SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 1984-03-20
TALK: Yogi Talks
LOCATION/EVENT: new-delhi-india
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:22:21
CHARS: 13315
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
Post navigation
Previous post:
Puja and Marriages
Next post:
Yogi Talks
Birthday Felicitations
New Delhi (India)  View Map
Tuesday, March 20th, 1984 
Leave a comment
Birthday Felicitations
Transcript (English) – Draft
English
Audio NITL
India, New Delhi
Subtitle Needed
43'
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English

1984-03-20 Talk At Birthday Felicitation Delhi India NITL HD, 43′
Show Video Details 
If you have more precise location information for this event, please write to [email protected]. 
IMPORTANT NOTICE: This text has NOT been verified. Would you like to help us verify? For more info, please click here. Please note that the text may be incomplete and contain errors, so caution is advised; we recommend cross-checking it with the original audio/video material. 


20 March 1984
Birthday Felicitations
New Delhi (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Talk at the Birthday Felicitation , Delhi , India. 20-03-1984

On this occasion I bow to all my children, to all the well-wishers, friends who have come here to express their kind feelings towards me. Thank you very much.

In such circumstances the words cannot express, the deep feeling of gratitude for all of you who have so kindly come down here. It is very important for us to realize one thing that the time has come for all of us to transform ourselves, all the possibilities of transformation is possible.  We all have to transform ourselves. We must raise our level from this human level to the higher level of spirit. Otherwise those who will not will not enter into the kingdom of god and may be destroyed. The time is very precarious and precious and the most opportune time.

Today is the day they have put a Sahasrara here, many one thousand petalled lotus surrounding the limbic area in our head. The coconut is called  as Shriphala which represents something like our brain and the inside of the coconut is the limbic area. In the same way we have got in our brain this limbic area on which many scientists have done a lot of research but they cannot go very far with it because they are doing everything from outside, it is only through Sahaja yoga you can understand what lies in that brain. All the seven centres about which I have told you in the previous lectures lies above this area.

To begin with is the mooladhara lies in the centre of your , you can say at this point you  see bone jetting out. I don’t want to use medical terminology because some people told me they can’t understand, now around that moves this Swadishthana chakra, you must have seen people who suffer from diabetes always lose their eye sight, eye sight is first affected when they have diabetics trouble. What is the reason? The reason is the Swadishthana is in the stomach the centre and the pitha or you can say the seat of that Swadishthana chakra is here at the back of your head where the lobe which supply the energy to the eye is seated. Around that, around that moves the Swadishthana in the centre is the mooladhara around that moves the Swadishthana which is responsible for this over activity when we think too much it is over active and the conversion of the fat cells from the stomach to the brain is done in such a fast speed, when we think too much we are futuristic that all other organs are neglected. So such a Swadishthana which gets hectic, which doesn’t understand what to do , now gets out of gear, because of that one of the organs being the pancreas gets no energy from the swadistan, it gets out of order and you develop diabetics. Anything goes wrong with the swadistana , spoils the seat of the swadistana around the mooladhara which is in the center. So by that you get your eyes blinded because it is pushing down the mooladhara which is in the center of it. So no use treating the eyes, best thing is to treat your mooladhara or treat your swadistana because swadistana is absolutely augmenting the movement of the mooladhara which has to support the optic lobe.

So it is so important to keep our mental being very sensible and balanced. It’s very important, this is only about one chakra , I have told you but all the seven chakras lie above the limbic area. All the seven chakras, so every chakra has got its seat over this limbic area hence it’s very important how mentally we are equipped. I don’t know what happens in the north India but in the south or specially in the Maharastra area there is a common practice of parents all the time asking the children where is your attention ( in Marathi ) where is your attention, where is our attention, is very important , attention is the most important, where is our attention because attention is the one which expresses our conscious mind.  

If our attention is all the time running from one place to another and from that place to another we develop a temperament which is very hectic, which is irritable. Which is uncertain cannot sit for five minutes quietly. I must tell you that in England there is a very big hall called Albert hall where you can have even 6000 people for any orchestra or for any music program anytime like this and you are not even allowed to cough during that 3 hour program if they have ,you are not even allowed to cough. Let alone going out, moving out, or getting all these kind  of hectic behaviour. You can not get out of that place.  Whether it is boring, it’s horrible, it’s no good, it don’t like it, it doesn’t matter. But if you are into the hall then be seated for 3 hours continuously, you are not allowed to move out not even to cough and I have seen people being lords and ladies and prime ministers and all those attending that hall all sitting tight, respecting musicians, respecting the music, respecting all that  they have created because they are so involved with them. But in India despite the fact our country has tremendous vibrations , tremendous depth, tremendous dignity. See imagine the kind of music we have produced. Even if these people labour for  thousands of years they cannot produce this. Believe me they cannot produce. You should see any one of their great master playing except for three ,four people whom I should say were realized souls, they could be playing something of a rare quality. But otherwise they cannot play like this spontaneous music , not one person can do that even if he labours for thousands of years. This is the beauty of our music in this country. The beauty of our arts, the beauty of our things they cannot produce, they just cannot do it. They haven’t got that depth, why? Because this mother earth has given us that balance, that peace, that depth within us that we the Indians can do that. Ask them to make one ornament, I lost once one ornament and asked them if they could make it, they said they cannot, they just can’t do it.   You make them anything higher, greater and all that but in fine arts they cannot come near us in any arts.

What’s so ever. Now what is the reason, how is it that the Indians have done it and still maintained despite the fact that most of the Indian’s have lost the capacity to respect, to realise where are we standing on this mother earth .the mother earth who has got its kundalini here and Sahasrara also here. The kundalini is in the Maharashtra and Sahasrara is in Himalayas. Anybody who comes in between this has to be realized, has to be a great person.

When I say this many people think that are very wrong ideas about Indians, may be but not about India.India you can be sure, one day when the kundalini will rise will shoot off everyone and we will show the what greatness we have.This is why it’s very important that we should workout .sahaja yoga in a very deeper way .first of all we must know Indians have to, Indians have to be deep, very deep. We cannot afford to be frivolous, cheap or something slavish. we cannot afford to be slavish. I have seen people now a days are so much enamoured by foreign things, foreign goods. What do they have nothing but plastic affluence , absolutely they have nothing. The Sahaj  yogies who got realization they get shock when they go to music centre and see people there are buying cheap ordinary music which they would not even care. so why this disparity is within us may be the slavishness of  so many years .but when we were slaves we were much better off but today when we are free I don’t know what has happened to us that we have lost that system of dignity, we have lost our dignity. That’s why I wanted him to play raga darbari. Darbari raga settles your kundalini in complete dignity. She rises with complete dignity and glory and pierces your brahmarandra . She is your mother and source of all dignity . She is source of all the chastity that you think .she is source of all the pride, you should have .all those qualities have vanished from my great country and I cannot understand when that ambe the Chandi rise within. When are you going to be charmed by the great force that lies within us. You are great people to be born in this country. This Sahasrara of yours is there as represented in the Himalayas, you have Himalayas on your head here which as to be just ignited with your kundalini which lies down, but we live in a very cheap style of life extremely cheap which has no dignity. We take to western life without thinking what are we ,what is our purpose of coming on this earth at this time .We are going to be leaders of the whole universe. All the world is going to fall at our feet for this because you know science has failed completely. They have realized that science cannot take you to far and where are they going to fall back. Is this country of ours and on you people who are great children of this motherland .The Sahasrara lies in the  Himalayas and how do you believe me that it lies in Himalayas . If you go any time to visit the ranges of Himalayas . If you go any time to visit the ranges of Himalayas who will be surprised the tremendous vibration flow from Himalayas towards the sky . You can see lights and lights going up if you are a realized soul , otherwise you may not see it’s a tremendous country, its tremendous opportune time. You are great people to be born at this time to get this . Only thing is you should assume your power , assumption is only possible if you know your country. You don’t know anything about your country. You don’t know what beauty it has. Nowhere in the world sandalwood is produced in the way its produced in this country. Nowhere in the world the clay or motifs smell so well as it smells here . Nowhere in the world you get so many types of champas that you get here , beautiful fragrant trees. Anyone who has visited this country any western man saying alright our gardens are alright but we don’t have any fragrance. This country’s fragrance is its magnetism has become fragrant why what is happening to us is that we do not know our magnetism our dignity our guru tattwa . We have become (eccentric )or we have become absolutely abundant if you are dignified your (eccentric ) one track mind of the another side is that you are absolutely abundant all the norms of an Indian life . So far Sahaja yogis who got realization it is important to go down to your traditions to understand that money never gives you happiness but you spirit and to get your spirit you must know Indian traditions because these traditions comes from the roots and if you have to go to your roots you have to know the tradition of this country. How these traditions have been built of course there have been many attacks on us and so our traditions have been quite (utilated)  but if you go deep down into it you will be surprised how our life has made to get only the self-realization to make beautiful mature personality. Sahasrara of India is the most beautiful place if you cannot see it you cannot enjoy it . What am i to do? I am the only one who enjoys Sahasrara has got all the petals, thousand petals like these beautiful colours which opens out and I see them dangling like the living flames of beauty and silence. Inside that you see the agnya chakra all over that. It is such a beautiful thing to see Sahasrara of an Indian, there is no pride, there is no conditioning, nothing, but just the joy of the spirit flowing into it. That joy has to come into all of us. Today is the time when Sahasrara has opened up. It’s the first time it has happened on mass scale and on the mass scale nobody has been able to do that though secretly many people did very slowly one by one people got realization but such a mass scale happening never took place. It took place now. Now perhaps we must know that you must be great people, must be that you have done great punyas, that the Sahasrara is opened now, that your