SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 1987-05-19
TALK: Departure from Burwood Ashram
LOCATION/EVENT: adelaide-australia
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:20:14
CHARS: 107677
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
Post navigation
Previous post:
Interview with ABC after Public Program
Next post:
Departure from Burwood Ashram
To get to realization, you have to have people of quality and a calibre
Adelaide (Australia)  View Map
Tuesday, May 19th, 1987 
Leave a comment
Public Program
Transcript (English) – Draft
English
Audio
Video DP-RAW
Adelaide, Australia
120'
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English

1987-05-19 To get to realization, you have to have people of quality and a calibre, Adelaide, DP-RAW, 146′
Show Video Details 
If you have more precise location information for this event, please write to help@amruta.org. 
This page is also available on the Learn Sahaja Yoga website. We encourage you to share it widely to spread Sahaja Yoga knowledge! 
IMPORTANT NOTICE: This text has NOT been verified. Would you like to help us verify? For more info, please click here. Please note that the text may be incomplete and contain errors, so caution is advised; we recommend cross-checking it with the original audio/video material. 


19 May 1987
Public Program
Adelaide (Australia)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Public Program

(A Sahaj yogi addressing the audience, speaking specifically to someone) If you come here to disrupt the meeting, then I have a right to get you moved. You come here to listen and then to ask questions when the question time comes up. Fine. But let’s not, lets not peddle our own bicycles because you have a particular problem.

(A lady’s voice from the audience) Haha. (Not clear) followed by clapping from the audience

Sahaj Yogi: And you too. Thank you. Now, I am standing, am walking around here. Four years ago, I walked with the brace. I had a belt and my leg was in a caliper because I had a prolonged disc in my spine, which caused my sciatic nerve to flatten and I lost the use of my right leg. I am not claiming, that Sahaja Yoga was totally responsible for my present condition because I know there would be regeneration, but the best medical advice you can get will tell you, that regeneration does not continue much beyond eighteen months. It is still continuing.

I have a daughter. I am speaking in the first person because I don’t see any point in speaking about other people. I have a daughter, who was a heroin addict. She gave up heroin in two weeks after she got what Mother calls self-realization. She is now married. She has one child and another one is expected. And she has totally changed. That came about not through some mumbo-jumbo or not through some curious form of standing on your head and doing strange yogic practices. But simply by getting her self-realization and concentrating on the perfection of herself. That is what Sahaja Yoga is about.

We are all human beings. So, in Sahaja Yoga from time to time, of course we had clashes. We had people who don’t agree and people who for various reasons are asked to leave. As I said you cannot join Sahaja Yoga. You can only practice it. Please come. (Interruption from a lady in the audience, unclear)

Jenny: Excuse me, may I ask a question? [UNCLEAR] impossible state of mind, how do you ask someone [UNCLEAR]?

Yogi: If you are living in a house Madam and you are not conforming to the way in which the other people in that house wish to live together.

Stevens: Conform not perform. Conform. If you are living in a house with other people and then they consider that you are aggressing them. And be careful Jenny. Because I have someone in the audience that you aggressed. Fact, she’s just coming in now. (Voices and disturbance from the audience) There is a question time after.

(A man amongst the audience speaking, inaudible)

Stevens: We expected this you see, that is why the gentlemen of the press are here. I am sorry for those who came to hear about Sahaja Yoga. It is one of the things we have no control over because this is a public meeting. And if people choose to come here and disturb it, till I make it quite clear that they intend to disrupt the meeting, we cannot ask them to leave. So, if you will bear with them, we will try to continue and tell you something about Sahaja Yoga.

I am a living proof, that things can happen physically to you, that wouldn’t otherwise be expected. My daughter is similarly someone, who has overcome a problem that is threatening a large section of our young community and it was done through self-realization.

What is this self-realization? Basically, if you look at this character behind me, you will see at the base of the spine a triangular bone. It was called Sacrum, interesting word because it means sacred. Within that sacrum bone, there resides a residual power, which has been lying rather like a seed that lies until it is put in the Earth until, such a time as the time when we are live in. When through a mechanism I don’t tend to understand through the agency of someone like Shri Mataji Nirmal Devi, this mechanism is activated.

When this mechanism is activated, the force if you like, the force be with you, the force passes up the Central Nervous System. And believe it or not and many of you, I hope will experience it tonight. If we don’t have too many interruptions. You actually feel sensation in your hands and the on top of your head in the form of a coolness. Now, that sounds wild, highly unlikely, but in fact, it happens. When this happens, there is a signal to you on Central Nervous System, that something unusual has taken place.

In terms of Yoga, in terms of what Yoga means, that is a union or a connection. If you like that television camera over there, is a remarkable piece of a modern day technology. But until I plug it into their battery power, the package, I don’t know whether that’s what it is or into the power point on the skirting board over there. It really is the useless pile of junk. Now we are not a useless pile of junk, but we are a point in our evolution, where unless something happens and something changes. We are not going to survive because we live in a world that is distrustful. We live in a world, that is unable to tell the difference between truth and falsehood. And so we are all on a merry-go-round. We don’t seem to be able to get out of the continuing cycle of kill or be killed. Put down or be put down. Sell or die, you know. We have to change. The world is getting fuller and fuller of people.

(Interruption from the audience)

Stevens: Oh for goodness sake will you please keep quite.

Lady: Speak for yourself mate, I’m doing all right.

Stevens: I am speaking myself.

(Lady interrupting again, many voices can be heard)

Lady: So don’t say we then, stop saying we. Like we are all…

Audience: [Inaudible].

Stevens: I don’t know what’s got into you. I noticed you’re wired for sound. This lady is wired for sound, you’ll be please to know. She has a microphone on her lapel, which is set so everybody could hear what she has to say. You can tell from that. You can tell from that, that she has come deliberately to disrupt this meeting. I want you to know that now. So, whatever she says or does, you can expect.

So, these seven-coloured balls represent the subtle plexuses in the body. If they are, wherever there is a nerve plexus there are subtle plexuses alongside. They reflect our attitudes and our behaviour. The heart is the centre of security and it is, isn’t it? If you get a fright, you go, you can feel your heart race. There are several medical practitioners in Sahaja Yoga, mainly in the United Kingdom. And they are doing research into this. For instance, they have discovered (interruption from the audience) please you will have your time to ask questions afterwards. Let’s be fair. They have discovered, there is a high proportion of women who have breast cancer have husband trouble. And it’s obvious isn’t it that this is affecting their security. I mean there are people down here who don’t believe that, but it’s immaterial. They obviously don’t believe a lot of other things. If your security, if your security (interruption from the audience) yes similarly coming to that. If your security is threatened, this centre which is the, I forgotten the name of it, the plexuses, I am speaking of the physical plexuses. It affects your lungs, it affects your heart rate. It affects your well being in the sense that if your security is sufficiently threatened you start to exhibit a disease. It has thrown your whole system out of balance.

What Sahaja Yoga is talking about is balance. If you can keep in balance, then you have a fairly healthy life. There are still accidents. You can still, unfortunately, get into the way of disease, but generally speaking, you will find you are much more resistant. We are not saying that Sahaja Yoga is the cure or of all things. We still have a very long way to go but it is, in essence, the next step that we must take if we are going to progress in our evolution.

Some of us will not. Some of us will choose not to but nonetheless, others will like to and will try. One of the things that Shri Mataji is very often says, is that you must look at this thing like a scientist. You don’t have to believe what I say. You don’t have to believe what Shri Mataji says, but its fare to listen. It is fair to look at it and see whether there is a truth in it, to see whether it works. And if it works, well why not give it a try. You are not going to lose anything. She doesn’t require money for it.

(interruption from Jenny from the audience)

Jenny: [UNCLEAR] for spiritual enlightenment?

Stevens: I beg your pardon?

Jenny: Are you suggesting is evolution is constantly evolving?

Stevens: Yes indeed.

Jenny: Ah, what particular brand is this?

Stevens: There is no particular brand of in spiritual enlightenment. Spiritual enlightenment is spiritual enlightenment. Are you trying to divide up the…

Jenny: But you’re form of spiritual enlightenment differs from the other religions, say that this one is a special one?

Stevens: I didn’t say it is a religion.

Jenny: (inaudible)

Stevens: it is a way to improving yourself. It is a way to developing yourself in your evolution. It’s the connection with the all-pervading power which obviously makes the world tick.

Jenny: Obviously.

Stevens: If you experience it, you would understand. It’s very difficult to explain to people what I am talking about if you have never had this experience. It is almost impossible to expect you to understand. If I want to…

(interruption from Jenny)

Stevens: You have the opportunity. You have the opportunity. Whether or not you succeed because it’s up to entirely. I can’t explain to you what fish tastes like if you have never eaten a fish. I can tell you roughly speaking what it is but you have to experience it. And what we are basically talking about now is a physical manifestation of something that occurs. These people are sitting with notes. You can see how well prepared they are.

Jenny: (inaudible)

Stevens: Oh. Thank you, posterity.

Man from audience: Ask your questions later.

Stevens: The questions will come later. There is always a time. Would you please keep quiet. There is always a time.

(Clapping from the audience)

Stevens: We really did come here to talk to people about Sahaja Yoga and what spiritual enlightenment is all about. We didn’t really come here to talk about armoured cars in drag.

(Laughter in the audience, and more interruptions from Jenny)

Stevens: Now, I don’t understand why you people don’t get a hall and invite people to come to explain what your problems (interruption from Jenny) I haven’t any money.

Jenny: (inaudible)

Stevens: No. It’s not. I have no money. There is no organization. There are a lot of people in the organization to put up money to hire this hall. Is that wrong?

(Interruption again)

Stevens: Shri Mataji is coming.

Stevens: Now may I (interruption by moved microphone) Will you listen to what Shri Mataji has to say? There will be a question time after. If you insist on interrupting then I’ll ask security people to remove you. We are entitled to do that. You had a fair go till now. I think you will all agree with me that she had a fair go (sudden clapping from the audience)

Shri Mataji: What’s happened?

(The yogi tells something in her ear while she is smiling)

Yogi: They’ve been asking questions and generally trying to upset everybody.

Shri Mataji: I see.

Stevens: Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi is here to explain to you what is the truth. Truth is experienced on your Central Nervous System. It is not something that you have to believe. It is not something that somebody had told you. It is something that happens. And no amount of talking or shouting from the auditorium will make any difference. Truth is truth. And because we are such sceptical people but it’s not I mean people in the human race. I am not talking about Australians or anybody else. It is not surprising that Pilate said to Christ, What is truth? It’s not at all surprising because there are always people shouting you down when you speak the truth. Tonight you will hear the truth. Tonight Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi will tell you the truth. She will give you the truth. Hope you will listen.

Shri Mataji: What’s that? (She laughs addressing a Sahaj yogi)

I bow to all the seekers of truth. Now, we have the knowledge with us through science and through other enterprises about the tree of life which is outside. But when it comes to the roots of the tree, we have to understand it has to be a subtler knowledge and…

(interruption)

Audience member: Can’t hear.

Shri Mataji: You can’t hear? Something wrong here (a yogi comes to change the mic) Mic is not working. Must be some mischief.

Stevens: Something wrong with this.

Shri Mataji: All right?

Some audience: (unclear)

Shri Mataji: Beg your pardon. Some mischief has been done. That’s Adelaide. Always I have to face something like that in Adelaide.

Yogi: It must be a special place.

Shri Mataji: A special place I must say (laughing). Ah. Good.

(The mic is falling from its position and yogi is adjusting it)

Shri Mataji: (to the Stevens) Move it a little bit down. All right.

Shri Mataji: (to the Sahaja yogi) It has to be brought like that a little bit. So, it’s facing, now, thank you. Ya. Here down. alright. I bow to all the seekers of truth. We know the truth about the tree of life through our search in science and other enterprises we have taken through. But still, we have to find out our roots. Unless and until we find our roots, we cannot nourish this tree of life. This tree of life had grown beyond the supply of energy, that can come from the roots. But as the tree grows also the roots grow downward, and in that search, I have been lucky enough to find out the method to give an en masse, that subtle thing called as the SPIRIT. The spirit is your own, is the God Almighty reflected in your heart. He resides in your heart all the time. He watches you but he doesn’t come into action. He doesn’t come into your attention.

The power of God is the Holy Ghost, is the desire of God to take you into his kingdom. That is reflected in this triangular Bone called as SACRUM. Surprisingly, this bone was known to the Greeks. That’s why they called it ‘Sacrum’ meaning sacred. Greeks came quite close to the search of this truth, but suddenly I don’t know what happened to them, that they also started going outward becoming extroverts. I have been to Greece and I have seen ‘Athens’ itself means Primordial Mother Athena. In Sanskrit, it is called ‘Ath’ means Primordial.

In the same way, so many great Prophets, Incarnations came on this Earth to tell you, that you have to become the SPIRIT. Even in Kuran in the very beginning of it, it is written, that you have to be connected to God. Without a connection to God or his power, you cannot talk about God. You cannot understand God and if you try to do anything, you become aggressive, dominating and ultimately cruel. But just think of (interruption from a lady sitting in the audience) please let me finish Madam. Just a minute. Just a minute. Have patience. There is no need to be so disturbed. This is a place we are trying about our self-realization. You too have got it within you. You too have got that Spirit within you. Be patient. Better know your own properties slowly. Be patient. I am not taking anything away from you. Just be patient. Alright. No use being aggressive. Please, Please, Please. Please, please, please. Now, this is. I cannot hear you. What’s the use? Now, Let us be. You see this is the trouble. You need really, in Marathi it is said (tyala paije jyati che) to get to realization, you have to have people of quality and a calibre. Superficial, cheap people cannot get realization.


In the olden times in India, they gave self-realization to one or two persons. One or two persons. At the time of Rama, there was one fellow called Nachiketa, who came to Nanaka, who came to Janaka, the father-in-law of Rama, who was a great saint and asked him, ‘Sir will you give me realization?’ He said, ask me the whole world, that I can give you but not realization. He had to go through severe tests, then self-realization was granted.But then when I was born, I found the world in a complete chaos. People have no time and there are so many useless people in this world, that they are the ‘murmuring souls’ as described by Christ. And they will spoil all the rest of them. And there won’t be any chance for them to take to a lengthy process of self-realization, that one by one I clear the chakras. So very assiduously I studied the problems of human beings. I was amazed that the modern human beings are very complicated, much more complicated than what people were.

I was told that some very good Christians came in Adelaide to settle down here, but they are no more. They are no more. And such people who have their own projections of doing this and doing that and doing that, trying every sort of thing just to have some new things spoil themselves completely within them. It was a very difficult task, to begin with.

I had first only one lady and after two years I could give realization to only twelve people. In London, I had to work for four years on seven people, for four years to give them realization. But there is one thing about English. They are hard nuts. But once they are there, they are there. So, in the west I never thought, I would ever work. Because I was not sure, that I’ll be able to do that. But unfortunately or fortunately, my husband got elected to this post four times, that too unanimously. And that’s how I am in England.

Whatever it is, one has to realize, that whatever these Prophets have said, these incarnations have said, since long they have talked about the roots and not about the tree. But when such a thing starts, also there are people who are seekers of ages are born. They are seekers. They are serious seekers. There are many serious seekers in the west, I found. Very very serious people. They have read so much about religion, every religion. They are not conditioned people, very sensible people. And they started coming to India and fell into traps of many cults and many people.

From the year 1970, in a bigger hall than this, I had announced that you cannot charge any money for God’s work. You cannot live on the earnings of God’s love. That time I took the name of the people, who’d go all round and try to entice people and take money from them and live on that. Of course, surprisingly, nobody has yet prosecuted me. That was the first beginning of Sahaja Yoga, that we started thinking in the terms of mass realization.

But I had to study quite a lot. Because an Indian mind is very different from the western mind. An Indian knows that the aim of his life is self-realization. Of course, we have learnt so much from you about science, about Economics, about banking, insurances, but we have some knowledge about the roots. And there is no harm in learning something from India also, in case we know it is worth something.

The knowledge of the Kundalini was known to Indians thousands of years back. And also there are many examples of people getting realization. But they were very very few people. So, when I started studying people, I said there is a problem on the Chakras, on the centres.

If you have to become a subtle being, to enter into your roots, I have to see that your subtle being is completely manifesting. For that, your chakras have to be cleaned. These chakras can

be cleaned by various ways. And we started using various methods to clean them. Of course, all these methods that we used to cleanse them were according to the prescriptions we had from our other people, like putting the hands like this comes from Mohammed Saheb. Because Mohammed saheb has said, that at the time of resurrection your hands will speak.

We do not deny any religion whatsoever, because according to us all religions have truth hidden in a very subtle form and if you have that subtle understanding, you can approach that. Now, he has said that at the time of resurrection your hands will speak. And is a fact, your hands can speak no doubt. But you have to take your realization, otherwise, it doesn’t work out.

What we call is baptism is same as realization. It is that the centres are cleared out, then the Kundalini rises, that is the Holy Ghost rises and blesses you with your self-realization and opens out your fontanelle bone area. You’ll be surprised in New Zealand, a place like New Zealand the whole hall was full. We didn’t advertise much, but I don’t know why people were so sensitive. And they came and they told me, Mother. Like a booze, it came out of our head. But I must say, New Zealand people must be very deep people. There must be a very deep seeking in them and they are not affected by other conditionings. So surprising it was.

While in Melbourne also, I had a very good experience. I would say that it is the quality of a person that matters in Sahaj yoga very much because it is the becoming. Like an egg becomes the Bird. Like we can say a seed becomes a plant. Now, it is becoming is very important. And so we have to see if a person is willing to adapt that becoming. We have our ways and methods of telling how to do it.

Nanak Saheb has said ‘Sahaj samadhi lago’ He said only through Sahaj, by spontaneous happening, by a living process you get Samadhi. He said it. He said also that there are Ida and Pingla two nadis within us. Kabirdasa has clearly said it. So, into any cult when you go, you will find they do not talk of any religion as such. They do not give you any ideas as to what the essence of the religion is. They do not prove it you and they do not show you where it exists.

For example, we’ll say that Christ is within us. Now, where is Christ? Who was Christ? How he came on this Earth? How he was conceived? First in the heavens? What was the thing he did? We don’t know. If you just read the Bible, you won’t know. You have to read for that Devi Mahatmya. You have to understand through that, that Christ was the Omkara, means what you call the divine sound. He came out of that and that’s why he could walk on the water. There are so many things written about Christ in other books. And so many great things written in those books, that we do not want to go into them. And how are we going to understand him, but first of all realization is very important to expand your attention with an enlightened way.

I was happy to know that people in Adelaide are traditional. All good traditions are to be accepted. They are not to be given up. They are family people. That is also another good thing that they are family people. But the problem is that they are placed in such a chaotic condition,

that they cannot decide what is right and what is wrong. Now, these traditions which are good should be taken and on these traditions, we should build up to something that is wider and greater. As soon as you get your realization, you get your new awareness called ‘Collective consciousness’ about which Jung has written very clearly.

You have to become collectively conscious. But those who are superficial people don’t get it. Those people who have a problem on this centre (Shri Mataji pointing to her own Vishuddhi Chakra) do not get it. They do not feel it. Those people who are not serious minded don’t get it. If they don’t get it then they start blaming others then blaming themselves. There are so many who have got realization and so many are doing well. This is what is needed today. Unless and until you get your transformation, unless and until you become the Spirit, unless and until you get collective consciousness, the problems of this world cannot be solved. That’s a fact. But everybody doesn’t get it. Everybody cannot get it. And we cannot guarantee that. Those who can get it, has to be the people who should seriously understand the importance of self-realization.

For example in India no problem. We have say, the President of the world high court (unclear) he got his realization just like this in two minutes. And he was so amazed at it. He asked his wife all the way, we knew them very well otherwise also, to fly out from Udaipur to see me and to get her realization. To them, it is an important thing, very important thing. The most important thing is to become the Spirit. Because he is now the high court judge, Hail high court, the highest position he could reach. It doesn’t matter. It’s nothing great. If he has not got his self-realization, what’s the use of living in this world.

But the attention of the people has to move that side. And it has moved in the west quite a lot. There are definitely lots of seekers in the West. But the problem of the west I must tell you is something very different. The problem of the west is like this, that within us there are two systems which work Autonomous Nervous System. One is the left another is the right. The left one is called as Ida Nadi or you call the moon channel. Or the one which looks after (Shri Mataji stops to drink water) I have been lecturing every night for hours. Moon channel. Now the moon channel is the one that works out our desires. We get our desires through this left side moon channel.

And the right side one if you see it clearly, starts little from the second centre is the one we call it as, I mean no use telling in English. In English, there is no English names. It is called as Pingala. Now, this is the channel that works out our action. First one gives us desire and the second one gives us action. Now, a person who goes to extremes on anyone of them tries to go away from the centre. For example, now we have in the West, lots of ideas say about action. Now, this is the right side. This is the left side. (Shri Mataji is showing by her hands the three channels) Now we have the right and left and the centre in between. Alright. Now, if you are too much into action on the right side, go into imbalance, it breaks the connection with the mains. If it breaks the connection with the mains, then what happens, you start working on your own this side. The connection the control goes away. Once the control of the central nervous system is gone, you can become malignant, you can develop any diseases of that kind which are psychosomatic.

Also with the physical exertions, and all that you can develop some other diseases which are more physical. Now, going to extremes, for example, for ladies I have always told, who are married ladies I have always told about them, that they really work very hard in the west. In the sense, their standards are so high, everything should be spick n span. All the time cleaning. They have no time to rest. They have no time to rest at all. They must take out some time to rest and look after themselves as well. They should involve the whole family in the work and see that there is a little balance. It should not be that only the woman should go on working all the time for the household. Of course, homemaking is her love and her liking, but that doesn’t mean that she should completely sort of get ruined with that. She has to use a balance. She should use some balances which are useful to keep her up herself in the centre. So, what we say that everything should be done in a moderate form.

(Again some disturbance from the lady in the audience)

Shri Mataji: Please. Please, Madam. Please. Please. Everything should be (to the lady) you are not the only one listening there are many other, see listen. I’ll tell you madam see. Now, one thing I must tell you. There are so many who have come here all the way. And I have come all the way from London. Alright. Understand that. You are not the only person who has come to listen. But why you don’t allow others to listen? This is uncivil. You are not civil. You should allow others to listen. They have come to listen to me, not to you. Keep quiet. I’ll listen to you later on. Alright. There should be sensible thing. This is no sense. What’s the use? If I am ( more noise from the audience) but I mean whatever your ideas are groping inside you keep to yourself. Why do you want to force it on me? (Further noise from the audience) Alright. Let me make. Then you hold a meeting and make it. Can you get even get one person to listen to you, Madam? I would like to, no, no, no, no. Please. (Shri Mataji is laughing) Just see. They have not come to listen to you at all. They have come to listen to me. Alright. None of them are here to listen to you. It’s a simple thing like that. Why are you talking? If you want to talk, let us, you can have a meeting of a bigger quality. Talk to them, tell them whatever you want to tell. It’s alright. (Still, noise can be heard from the audience) And I won’t disturb you. (More noises) Arey. Let me tell them alright. Now keep it to yourself. Nobody had come to( ) alright.

Now (Shri Mataji gives a big smile) this is the, I was telling you about the extreme behaviour of anything is not good. We have to keep in balance. When we come in the balance, in a moderate way if we live, then what happens that we keep this contact all the time with a whole. Now the Kundalini that is down below in three and a half coils has to rise through all this. When she rises through all these, she pierces through your fontanelle bone area and you actually feel the cool breeze coming out of your head. If you do not feel it and you say I am feeling it, you are a hypocrite. I am not going to say you are feeling it. It is you who has to say. There are many people who come to Sahaj yoga like that. I am feeling it, good, this, that unnecessarily. Why

should they try to deceive themselves? You are not to deceive yourself. You see yourself, that you feel the cool breeze coming out of your head. (Same lady from the audience again interrupting)

Shri Mataji: Are you Ginnie? Are you Ginnie? What’s it? I can’t hear you, sorry. I can’t hear you, Madam. I am sorry. (Lady say something inaudible) No. I am not. I can’t hear you. No. I am not. I am not. You shouldn’t say like that. No. I am not a liar. I am not hearing you at all. And I’ll give you a chance to talk. Alright. Despite everything, I’ll give you a chance to talk. There is a letter against you here. (Shri Mataji picks up from the table and shows the letter) Are you Ginnie? Are you Ginnie? (The lady replies inaudible) Shri Mataji: Jenny? You thinned down very much I must say. You were a much fatter person. Were you?

Lady:(inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Yes. I know. Now there is a letter about you here, which I don’t want to read it out. It’s not good but you better read it yourself. No, no, no. I am not like you. I am not like you. Alright. Now keep the dignity of the whole thing. Be sensible. Be sensible. There is nothing it is so (interruption again from the lady).

Shri Mataji: (looking upset) But it’s not the time. They have not come here for me to (many voices from the audience)

Shri Mataji: Yes, Just see. Why should you take their time? They have not come here to listen (interruption)

Jenny: (inaudible)

Shri Mataji: (looking fed up) Madam. you see, I didn’t even know you much. You see, this is, you are. She herself, see now, this lady says that she was driven out. Means she was sticking on. She herself never went away. Why didn’t she go away, if she didn’t like it? That’s the simple thing. She should have gone away. Why was she sticking on?

Jenny: (inaudible)

Shri Mataji: (asking the yogi) What is she saying?

Jenny: (shouting in reply but inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Oh. I see. There is a letter about that, your brainwashing. Nirmala, you know Nirmala? Now, read it out now. Better have it.

Jenny: (inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Alright. Let it be. What she has to say about you. If you can say something, she can also say something. Alright. She also has a right to say. (Handing over the letter to yogi standing next to Shri Mataji) Now, let it be. Read it out. Stevens. Do you mind reading it out? Once for all. Listen to this. What she has to say about you. (Stevens commence reading the letter)

Shri Mataji: He has sent a telegram. (Stevens continues to read, inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Take this. (Shri Mataji tells Stevens to change the mike and he comes to take it)

Shri Mataji: That’s wasting of time. It’s Adelaide speciality. Ha. Ha. Ha. (yogis removing the mike) We should, I don’t know what’s the matter. But last time we have gone again, they came to hit me. Before that, there was some other. All the time you have a group like that. All the time and I am surprised. You see if some people can’t do Sahaj yoga, alright give it up. Why should they be thrown out? (Voice from the audience) That’s all. And you can go to the courts. You see. Not here. Why doesn’t she go to the courts. (yogis still managing the mikes placed before Shri Mataji) You see. That’s sensible. She is angry alright. (Shri Mataji laughing suddenly) Why is she so angry? And now listen now. Another angry person will listen to her. What she has done to her. (Someone in the audience, inaudible)

Stevens: (addressing the audience, inaudible) (Someone in the audience, inaudible) Shri Mataji: Just a waste of time. Alright. But this is not the place. My child. This is not. See If she is hurt she would have written to me. She would have come and seen me. She would have talked to me. (Someone in the audience, inaudible)

Shri Mataji: This is, don’t waste, you see. You see, nobody had come to listen to her. If somebody is hurt, is this civil? You tell me.

Audience: (inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Others have come here to listen to me. Alright. But why to expose here? Why to demonstrate here? She can come and see me tomorrow. I will give her time. One hour, two hours, whatever she wants. Alright. But why disturb everyone? They have come for their realization. Let them have. Why do you want to be dog in the manger?

(Voices from the audience)

Shri Mataji: But it is justifiable. (laughing) (Stevens reads the letter, inaudible, and there is clapping and cheering from the audience

Shri Mataji smiles and folds her hand in namaste)

Shri Mataji: Now. Alright. Alright, just listen to this letter. You have one complaint, she has another complaint about you. She told me on the phone, that it is about you she has written, but this is what she has said. Now, there is a complaint about her. You see, in any group, there can be complaints about people. We have driven out so many men also from Sahaj yoga. So many but you see driven out. We had to ask them to get out. They never went out. If she would have gone out then I would have understood her, that she had grudges. But when was asked to get out, then she has grudges, means that we should have a grudge about her. Isn’t it? (Shri Mataji smiling)

Jenny: (Inaudible)

Shri Mataji: I can’t just hear. I don’t know what has happened. (looking up towards Stevens standing on her right) (Addressing Jenny) Alright. Let it be. Let them. Jenny. There is no need to be that aggressive with me. There is no need. Alright. No need. Come along.

(A Male voice from the audience, inaudible)

Shri Mataji: See now. This is too much.

(A lady perhaps Jenny speaking very harshly but inaudible)

Shri Mataji: You were in Sahaja Yoga? (there is cheering and clapping by the crowd. Shri Mataji is laughing) I tell you this Adelaide business.

(Voices from the audience inaudible)

Shri Mataji: You are not allowing me to speak at all. But this is not the way. If one person is hurt, this is not the way. Now if she is hurt, she could have come and told me. She would have. She is welcome for that. She could have told me this has what has happened. Anything. You see. There are ways.

(Lady’s voice from the audience, inaudible)

Shri Mataji: It is quite simple my Child. She looks quite alright. You don’t know what she has done. If you read the letter. (Addressing Stevens) Why don’t you read the letter?

(the lady is constantly speaking from the audience and perhaps Stevens is replying, inaudible)

Shri Mataji: What is it? (In the Hindi language) Bevakoofon ki kami nahin hai Galib. (meaning ‘there is no dearth of fools’ as said by Galib the great poet)

(There are noises and clapping from the audience, reason not known)

Shri Mataji:(smiling) What is this? (Shri Mataji laughing) I mean what can I do?

(Lady perhaps Jenny speaking again and yogi Stevens replying to her, inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Yes this is not proper. This is not being kind to your people in Adelaide. This is dog in the manger. This is. No. no. no. no. no. no. Jenny. That’s not proper. No. no. Is not proper. is not proper. There is no propriety. I must say. There is no propriety. This is not the way to behave. You could come and see me. I am here only for one day. There are so many people, who wanted to hear me. Now you jump, you want me to hear you, is selfish. isn’t it. Of course, very selfish. You should come and see me. I have told you, come and see. I can talk to you. I talk to all of them and tell them whatever is wrong. We’ll try to correct it. That’s the simple way. But this is being very selfish. Just to correct it, attract the attention of everyone. If you call a meeting will you have these people there? No.

Jenny: (inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Alright. Six years is finished. Eight years is finished. I have been working for sixteen years, and I have had people like this. (Shri Mataji pointing towards Janie) So, what am I to do? I have been Eh? How much what?

(Voice of Jenny and another man, inaudible)

Shri Mataji: I have paid from my own bank quite a lot, for your information. You know for definite. That’s there. You should not lie. That is Janie now you don’t lie there. You know I have paid out of my pockets. You know that very very well. Now, don’t tell lies there. Oh. No. You know that. You can’t say this.

Jenny:(inaudible)

Shri Mataji: What jewellery? Which jewellery? Nothing. I all. You see. Actually, you’ll be surprised (interruption)

Jenny:(inaudible)

Shri Mataji: What jewellery? What jewellery? No jewellery? What jewellery you gave me?

Jenny:(inaudible)

Shri Mataji: What did she give me?

Jenny:(inaudible)

Shri Mataji: I mean, just imagine. (Shri Mataji laughing) See now. I’ll, I’ll tell you one thing. She is. She is really. She is really. She is really talking through her hat. (Mix Noises from the audience)

Shri Mataji: If you ask my husband (Shri Mataji laughing) he’ll tell you. You see I (interruption from Janie shouting)

Shri Mataji: These feminist are. What are you doing? Why are you, why are you behaving like this? You see, this is not proper. It’s not being proper. No. No. Jenny. It’s not proper. You are making allegations which are absolutely false. You know that. You know that I have spent lots of money out of my pockets. And I have been giving lots of presents myself. And not a single thing you have given me, I have used it. No. no. No. No. no. no. no. no. No. No. No. is not correct.

Jenny:(inaudible)

Shri Mataji: What? (Shri Mataji asking Stevens about what Jenny is saying, what Stevens say and what Jenny is constantly speaking is inaudible) What’s it? Why do you? What? False you? Eh? No. No. No. I’ll tell you about. I’ll tell you about. Is she here? Melissa is she here? Is Paul here? Is he here? Is he here? Call him? I’ll tell him. He will know, why, why what happened. Let him be here. Why are you talking? No. You don’t talk for him. Why didn’t he come? Why didn’t he come? No. no. no. No. I know everything. I know everything that happens, everything. Alright. Sit down. Sit down.

Jenny: No.

Shri Mataji: Why not?

Jenny:(inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Now this one is a story. See, we had a thousand people in that place. Thousand.

Jenny: (inaudible)

Shri Mataji: I didn’t take. I never touch money. You know that very well.

Jenny:(inaudible)

Shri Mataji: No. No. I, Who?

Jenny:(inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Who’s brother? Who? Who gave me? (Shri Mataji laughing) Who? Who is this brother?

Jenny:(inaudible)

Shri Mataji: (looking up at Stevens in surprise) Ten thousand dollars. (Addressing Jenny) I have absolutely no knowledge. Is an absolute lie. This is a lie. I can put you on the court on this. No. Nothing of the kind. Nothing of the kind. If he had given me I would have known. And if he had put that money, I give it for Sahaj yoga work. I do not need your money. You must know that. I am sufficiently enough with myself and I give away my money, you know that very well Jenny and don’t tell lies.

Jenny: (inaudible)

Shri Mataji: I don’t know. I don’t know where is it. You find out. I have, first time I am hearing. See. I’ll tell you. First time I am hearing this from you that the person who died because I had cured him of AIDS. You know that and then he died.

Jenny: (shouting but inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Is he the one? No. Which one? Which one is William? Which one is this William? From Adelaide? Where? where? Who is this William?

Jenny: (inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Eh? Who? Who? Who? Who? I never say that. We never use those words. I never use.

Jenny: (inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Did I say to you? I never said. (laughing) All lies. I mean A to Z is a lie. Now, there are, there are so many people in our movement and if somebody says that, if I find it, if I know It I verify it and I throw him out. And she did the same, that’s why she was thrown out.

Jenny: (inaudible)

Shri Mataji: (addressing Stevens) Why not read the letter, why we threw her out. Just read the letter, why we threw her out.

(Stevens reads out the letter, inaudible, Jenny speaking relentlessly, clapping from the audience)

Shri Mataji: This the way. (Addressing Jenny) Why do you want to get insulted? Why do you want to get insulted for nothing at all. Is all a lie. I must say it’s all lie.

Jenny: (shouting but inaudible)

Shri Mataji: I don’t need. (Jenny and few others leaving the hall) Let them go. It’s not correct. Absolutely a lie. What’s the name of the gentleman who gave the money? Just ask her also. What’s the name of the gentleman? You should find out. Hello. Mrs.Jenny. Please tell us who is the gentleman.

Jenny: (shouting but inaudible)

Shri Mataji: No. No. We want to know. Hello. I want to know the name of the gentleman who left the money. Will you please tell? Please tell me. I want to find out. I will find out.

Stevens: (inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Who? Who was he? (addressing Jenny) And now who is the gentleman give us the address. I must find out and if it is not so, I’ll sue you. I will sue you.. Alright. Bring it. Where is the thing? (Jenny shouting) Where is the ten thousand? Alright, let’s find out. No. No. No. No. To be exact, let us know who is the gentleman. Nobody gave. Just imagine. (Shri Mataji drinking water, Some mix noises from the audience) These are lies. I tell you

Stevens: (addressing the audience but inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Even this time, coming to Australia, I have purchased my own ticket. This extent. Now, this lady. They should tell me the name of the man who gave money. Supposing. (Voices from the audience. Shri Mataji looking at Jenny and friends and telling Stevens) You better get her removed. (To Jenny) You better go. You are very troublesome. (addressing the audience) You see they are the people who form sort of unions. And they did the same in the Ashrams. That’s not allowed in Sahaja Yoga. You are not supposed to form any unions like that. And these were saying, we are feminist and we must dominate men.

Jenny: (suddenly entering the hall and shouting) that’s shit.

Shri Mataji: Shit. That’s later (pointing to her left) What words. Imagine.

Jenny: (shouting words not clear)

Shri Mataji: You can’t abuse me.

Jenny: (still shouting, Stevens trying to stop her, words not clear)

Shri Mataji: Please, will you ask this lady and this one also to go? (Pointing at the Jenny and another lady) No. No. This one. This one with the orange dress. Ask her to go. Please. You see, I don’t want to insult you, Madam. But this is wrong to insult me like this. You can’t say all these words to me for nothing at all. I have done no wrong to anyone. I have always tried to help everyone. Spending my husband’s money. It’s a fact. You know that. (Someone speaks from the audience)

Shri Mataji: (suddenly smiling at the audience) Beg your Pardon. What’s he saying?

Audience:(inaudible)

Shri Mataji: What is he saying? (asking Stevens)

Stevens:( inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Quite a lot. I must say, quite a lot. You see he has now paid for my coming here. Alright. But sometimes they also feel ashamed, that I should pay for their salvation. So, they try to pay to the travellers. Not to me. I don’t need any money. Thank God. You know, if Christ was living I don’t know what you would have done to him. By God’s grace, I come from a rich family and my husband is quite well off. Otherwise, you would have finished off Christ, who was just a carpenter’s son. After all, if I have to travel, it’s better you pay for your salvation. But still, that also is paid by my husband. And sometimes he jokes also that all the Gurus are making big money and here is a one Guru who is giving her own money to others.

You see this is not a fact but somebody supposing gives something to me say precious. The other day one lady gave me a diamond. I don’t take it. I said sell it and whatever is the money, all this money should be donated for the work of Sahaja Yoga. Now the work of Sahaja Yoga is that we have to buy Ashrams for people to live. We have got a very nice school in Melbourne. Actually in Adelaide, we have done nothing. Here the people have not been constructive. But in Melbourne, we have got a beautiful school, where the government has certified that the school is so beautiful and the children are what they are claiming. So beautiful and such a private school doesn’t exist in Australia. That’s how they have certified the school.

It’s a primary school run by Sahaja Yogis. The Sahaja Yogis have to also sacrifice a little bit because you know the private school fees is quite a lot and everybody cannot afford to pay. And they are amazed at the children they are. Now if you want to make false allegations, what can anybody do. But I can prove it, that this money she is saying. Somebody took ten thousand. It is very difficult to give me anything. Very difficult. You try. Even my husband finds it difficult to give me anything. (Shri Mataji laughing) That’s not my nature to take. Alright. You see this is the main thing. A person who takes money, will not shout at the top of her voice all the time, that you cannot pay for God, openly.

This is the first time we have people here like this. And this lady, I must tell you has a problem. It’s a very funny problem which I don’t want to talk to you. And because of that problem, we had to ask her to go. (Jenny suddenly appearing again, saying something inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Come here. I’ll tell you. Come. I’ll tell you. If you come here I’ll tell you. Why do you want to know her problem? I’ll tell her not you. Who are you to ask me? I am not going to tell you.

(Lady perhaps Jenny speaking but inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Let her come and see me I’ll tell her. I am not going to tell you. Otherwise, why did we throw? Now there is one person, I’ll tell you as he said it. (Shri Mataji pointing at someone in the audience) This gentleman has said it correctly, that there may be somebody who did it. You see, there was one person. I don’t know if he did the same, the same here. But somebody who was a man, who was not a woman, and very very dominating. We threw him out. He is an Australian. We threw out three men and a few women. We had to because we are not supposed to dominate. You see, in a place where we have to think of God and of peace, we cannot have people who believe in dominating. We cannot have people who try to assert on anyone. Now the question of her husband being sick this Melissa, they haven’t come. Both of them haven’t come because I know the mistake was there’s.

They, I had told them not to sit in the sun too much. And not to drink too much of orange juice. But orange juice is such an attractive thing. They think they could not control. And he developed this diahorrea. We have three doctors always on the tour. Always we have three doctors on the tour to look after them. They are there free. They look after them. Now, we were in a very far off village when this fellow got this. Still, he was brought. They said we’ll take him to the hospital. She wouldn’t agree. She wouldn’t agree. She is such a neglecting wife, such a neglecting wife, that Indian women were surprised, how could she neglect her husband like that? It’s alright. He’ll be alright. She was postponing it. And it was our doctors who took him there. I mean they were admitted because of us. Because in India a foreigner cannot be admitted unless and until you have a doctor’s certificate. You know in India they are very particular about foreigners admitted. And that’s how they admitted.

Now there is another thing I’ll tell you. How bonafidice can be established of Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga also in India is very much respected. Any foreigner who goes to India has to have a clean chit from the doctor, except for Sahaj Yogis. In Delhi, you see the trouble is. In Bombay, in Delhi, we are doing so much but here it is so difficult. And also I’d say Rome is very good. Austria is good and also Australia partly is very good and partly very funny. (Shri Mataji smiles) Now, I’ll tell you one thing. In Delhi, they are having a proper investigation made for cancer, for liver and for asthma, how Sahaja Yoga can cure. They have already made. The Dean of the Faculty of Physiology, you can write to him. Mr Rai of Delhi University has already submitted a paper about Sahaja Yoga saying, that Sahaja Yogi has much better resistance than other people. Has proved it. And it is being accepted and published by the government. You can write to him and find out.

You see this is the trouble. Here no officers come. Such people come in who are good for nothing. They trouble us, do this, do that, all kinds of things, such problems. You get fed up with them. You see you are here to get your realization, to get well. To be alright, to be healthy people. To enjoy yourself, to have a good married life and to have sweet children. That’s why we are in Sahaja Yoga. Not to fight and claim things.

I mean this is a falsehood, complete falsehood, that somebody gave me ten thousand rupees. Complete falsehood. Why didn’t she tell me the name and address of the person? It’s impossible. I can’t take a single Pie. Why should I? What is the need for me to take? If you get Melissa’s husband Paul, he’ll tell you. He knows. He never came here. Why didn’t he come? The one who was sick. He never came. Melissa never came. These people are just putting up something. Some people are never in the Sahaja Yoga. Only this lady was. And she was troublesome. She gave us trouble. And we are, are we not free to ask somebody to go out of Sahaja Yoga, if she gives us trouble? Still, we should stick on to them? And the jewellery and all that. What jewellery you can give? I have so much jewellery. You see sometimes these people give some sort of jewellery, which is auctioned sometimes and given money to Sahaja Yoga.

I don’t take anything. I have so much jewellery. I don’t know what to do with it. Actually, I am giving away my jewellery, silver to all these people. All nonsense. My brother is here, who is a judge of the high court, Bombay High Court. He is sitting here and watching you people. Is this the way to behave? Very childish. Very childish. Despite that, you get your realization. (Shri Mataji smiling)

I must say, you people must be great in your last lives. How many mistakes people have committed here. How much we have tried to sort of harm ourselves. But you will get your realization. That’s the beauty of the whole thing. There must be something about you that you get your realization. But those who don’t get start fighting. Now, how can we give it there is no force? We cannot say now, Alright. now supposing there is one seed, which doesn’t sprout say. Then she says, I must sprout. Why don’t I sprout? Can you do that? It’s a living process, isn’t it? And we don’t tell the problems of one person to another. There are problems. Serious problems. Very very serious problems. People have we don’t tell because it’s not proper.

We know because we know their centres. And that’s how we know, what problems they have. I mean we have definitely cured people no doubt about it and you can be cured and you can enjoy your health. We have with us one psychiatrist here, who is first class first of Cambridge and first-class first, We have a psychiatrist. You see these are very mediocre people. We have people here who are very highly qualified, who are travelling with me. Absolutely mediocre people, nothing to do, living on dols. And we have been like this. This dol business should vanish from this country. I tell you half of your problems will be solved. Let them get to some work.

Let them know their value. That’s the problem is. Because of this dol business you see, there is no self-respect. And they don’t understand, that they must get their self-realization.

It is very surprising, that all the television and all that, just came here for the people to shout. And then they are not interested in this. Is this the way to encourage these people? Nothing good about them. What is so special? What good she has done? What is her importance?

(Voice of a lady, perhaps Jenny, inaudible)

Shri Mataji: She is still talking. Now please stop Madam. (Shri Mataji does Namaskar in her direction) (Voices of a man and a woman, Inaudible)

Shri Mataji: (slightly smiling) What’s she saying? What’s she saying?

(Someone replying to Shri Mataji, Inaudible)

(Someone replying to Shri Mataji, Inaudible)

Shri Mataji: What to do? You are not in balance. I have to stoop down to your level (laughing)

(Someone speaking to Shri Mataji, Inaudible)

Shri Mataji: You see, she is the same person who tried I am quite in balance but I have to stoop down to your levels to pull you out. I am quite in balance. Alright. (Shri Mataji laughing)

(Someone speaking to Shri Mataji, Inaudible)

Shri Mataji: Now Listen. Don’t tell me stories. Will you please stop that?

(Someone speaking to Shri Mataji, Inaudible)

Shri Mataji: You are not interested. No. You are not. You are not the one. (A yogini comes on the stage and Shri Mataji looks up at her enquiringly and smiling)

Yogini: Can I just say something?

Shri Mataji: Alright.

Yogini: I would like to say that Shri Mataji had given me so much in my life. So much peace and happiness. But I would just like to ask all to these four, two people here, two people here,

may be you two here. If you can’t keep quiet, I don’t know. But could you please just go now and let’s have the meeting, to give other people a chance to get what I had.

(Shri Mataji looking very pleased while there is applause from the audience)

(Someone speaking to Shri Mataji, Inaudible)

Shri Mataji : (still happy and laughing) Oh no. Will you please ask her to go now? Will you please? Now, this is a. Will you please? Can you please ask the? (interruption by voices Inaudible) So much time she has taken. I can’t help it. I was just in time for you. (Shri Mataji looking at Stevens who is standing to her left) Stevens. Please ask the policeman to take her out. She is talking too much. I mean, she doesn’t understand anything.

Stevens: (bending towards Shri Mataji and talking) I think the best thing will be just to talk about Sahaja Yoga.

Shri Mataji: Alright. So those who are interested in Sahaja Yoga should stay, the rest can go away. You see, it doesn’t matter how many people get it. The thing is as I have told you, only those who deserve it will get it. Everybody doesn’t get it. Doesn’t matter. Whatever has happened, I am sure you will get your realization. I am sure of it. It doesn’t matter because it’s the quality that matters. It is quality. Now. There are people who are anxious to get realization. (the audience applaud)

Shri Mataji: Don’t hurt her. (talking about Jenny) (In Marathi not clear) don’t hurt her.

(Voice of lady perhaps Genny, Inaudible)

Shri Mataji: (laughing, folding hands in namaskar to that lady) Baba. Ah-ha. What a relief. (Laughing) but don’t hurt her. Just let it be. Only thing you can’t crucify me (laughing again). Alright. Doesn’t matter. Take it easy. This is life. Now, as I was telling you, if you go to any extremes you break your connection with the whole. And as you break your connection with the whole, all these centres which are supplying horizontally to our mental, physical, emotional, spiritual being, get cut or get exhausted or augmented as they call in medical terminology. So, the central path is the parasympathetic nervous system, which doctors have not reached.

Now, through this Kundalini which is there, which is three and a half coil, when it rises, It pierces through six centres, pierces through your fontanelle bone area. And when it pierces through your fontanelle bone area, you get your self-realization. As simple as that. This is your mother. Individual mother, because she gives you birth, a second birth. And she doesn’t trouble you. She doesn’t give you any problems. She takes up all problems upon herself. She tries, but I have seen in some people the Kundalini is very badly hurt, wounded, just all the time like a bleeding serpent you can say. It’s just moving up and down helplessly trying to rise.

It rises and falls down in some people. And it is such a sad thing, that it works out in days together when the person co-operates to keep the Kundalini up there.

But most of the people get it. And with little practice in about a year or so at the most, they become masters. But within one month they know everything about Sahaja Yoga and they know how to do it. In fact, you become your own master. You don’t have to have any guru. You don’t have to have any master. For this, you don’t have to pay a single pie. You don’t have to do anything of that kind. It just works out automatically and you can give realization to others once you get it. When you become the master. But that is a quality which one has to achieve. If you achieve that quality then only you can do it. Otherwise, you cannot do it.

By talking about Spirit, by talking about God you do not achieve it. It is a living process of evolution. As we have become human beings, we become that higher being. This is the seeking today and that’s what people are seeking. They are not seeking something, which has been said or done, but they want beyond this what? And beyond this is the Spirit. But as I told you the people who are not of that quality, do not get it. But for that, you cannot blame anyone. You should not blame yourself and you should not feel guilty about it either. But you must know everybody, if they try can achieve it. Some people might get it today. Some people might get it tomorrow. Doesn’t matter. If you work it out it is very easy to get you self-realization in modern times.

Now, as in our country, we have searched in the subtler side of our life towards the roots. We have definitely found out so many things, so many poets, so many saints have written. Say, in the sixteenth century there was a great poet called Tukarama. He has described it very clearly. And then in the sixth century, we had Adi Shankaracharya who has described it. But later on, I would say, it was Guru Nanaka and Kabir who has described Kundalini in their scriptures.

The main point is, that in India also people got diverted. They were told that you should not read the sixth chapter of the Gyaneshwara because it talked about Kundalini. Because they did not want to do it. Because they did not know it. They had no authority. Like a priest class, they were. In the same way, in every religion, I think nobody tried to find out how to get self-realization. That was the problem and because of that people have suffered. There have been many great people who have been self-realized. Even we can say like Michael Anglo was a realized soul. Now if I say that, you can say how can you say, mother? You can ask me a question, Mother how can you say that Michael Anglo was or Mozart was? He was because when you put your attention to him and put your hands like this, you start getting cool vibrations in your hands.

That’s how you can find out who was a realized soul, who was not a realized soul. So, the truth you know through your hands not through your rationality, through your understanding. But you know what is right and what is wrong through your hands. Now, these are five centres (Shri Mataji indicating towards the chart showing subtle system) as shown there clearly. You can see on the hands. Hands are not shown on this one I think. Alright. These are the five centres.

This is the sixth and this is the seventh. The left-hand side is the emotional side and right-hand side is the physical and intelligence. (Shri Mataji showing the chakras on her hand) So these one, two, three, four, five, six and seven. These are the seven centres. Now somebody has a problem on any centre, you start feeling either a numbness, or a coolness, or a kind of a burning. Sometimes even little blisters come out of the thing.

Then you should know that the person . has problem of this centre. Now, if you know the decoding of this finger, what does it mean and how this is caused, you can correct it. If you can correct it, that person feels alright. You feel alright. And you have all the powers to cure that person and cure yourself and be one with the divine force.

It is all-pervading power of God everywhere as called, but we have never felt it. We have never felt the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost. Now, this is the first time we feel the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost. First time we feel. We become sensitive and we start feeling it. But those people who are conditioned, who are running after other things, who are members of this and members of that and members. All their life finishes as members of this and members of that. They do not get anything out of it and they do not know what is their meaning.

First time you know your meaning when you become the spirit. Unless and until you become the spirit you will not know your meaning. As I told today to the radio lady, that it’s like an instrument. Unless and until it is connected to the mains, it is useless. In the same way, unless and until we are connected to the mains, we are no good. We are not happy. We are not satisfied.

Now, this (in Hindi) ‘trikonakar asthi’ what we call as Sacrum Bone has that power, which is the pure desire within us. The pure desire. The pure desire is only one. The rest of the desires are impure. The pure desire is to rise and get to the divine power. Once you get that, it’s like a light coming into a lamp. Then what does the lamp do is to give realization to others? It starts giving lots of realization to others and starts giving all the(suddenly laughing) They are only interested in the quarrel part of it. Best thing. I mean, Just imagine. Otherwise, they would not come. It is such an important thing. Such an important thing. But they are only interested in the quarrel. If somebody is going to quarrel, they’ll line up. It’s not.

It’s not a very good thing you know. They must understand the importance of time. It is the most important time. This is the Judgement Time. Here you are going to get the power to judge you and judge others. And if you don’t develop that within you, you are lost. So, it is important for all of you to feel your Spirit. Now, I can go on talking like this for a long time. But I would like you to get your realization. And by God’s grace, I am sure it will work out.

Now, those who want to have their realization should stay and those who do not want please go away. You cannot force on anyone. You have to ask for it. I cannot force it on anyone. You see, It is something one should understand. It’s a living process. You become absolutely normal first of all. Normalcy means, that you do not feel guilty about anything. Be pleasant to yourself. You

should be pleasantly placed towards yourself. You should be in a happy mood. And should not think you have done this mistake and that mistake. Have committed this crime and that crime.

It is you who is going to judge yourself. It’s not me, it’s you who is going to judge afterwards when you have got your realization. It’s like this if supposing I have a snake in my hand. Alright. And somebody tells me there is a snake in your hand. And there is darkness. In my ego, I might say, No. I don’t believe. I am going to hold on to it. But then, somebody says, that put on the light. And the lights are on. You see the snake and you just drop it. It’s like that. So, the knowledge is the truth and truth is the knowledge and everything is the love of God and compassion. There is no place for hatred and anger in Sahaja Yoga.

Now, I think we have had too much of question and answering. Let us have our realization. Some people can come forward. It would be a better idea. You can move forward if some people want to come forward. No. No. No. Here. here.

Now be peaceful with yourself. First of all, forgive yourself. Forgive yourself. That’s very important. And be confident, that you are all capable of getting realization. Do not blame yourself for anything. Whatever you have done is forgiven absolutely. So, do not blame yourself. You have to have a complete faith in yourself. That’s very important. Alright.

Now, as I said the left hand is the desire. You please put your left hand on your lap. It would be nice if we could take out our shoes also to get help from the Mother Earth because she sucks in most of our problems very easily. It takes only five to seven minutes. But only thing is one should intensely ask for it and want it.

Please put your left hand towards me. Now, with the right hand, we do the action. Now, I will tell you how you will have to raise your own Kundalini. Alright. You will know how to raise your own Kundalini. And that’s how you can practice at home also. Now, this left hand is towards me i.e. you want your realization. Now, the right hand is first put on the heart, where resides the Spirit. Now, this right hand is taken down again on the centre here which is the centre as we call it Swadishthan, which is the centre which does all the I am sorry this is on the upper part of it there is the centre of the principal of your Mastery or guidance.

Below that, on the stomach, on the lower side of the abdomen. You have the lower side of the abdomen on the left-hand side you have a centre which is very very important. Which is of Swadishthana which works out all the processes of divine love or all the techniques of divine love. So, then you go back again on the upper part of your stomach left side again. The whole thing is working on the left-hand side. Then put your right hand on the heart.

Then please put your right hand on the neck and turn your head like this (Shri Mataji demonstrating how to do it) between the corner of the neck and the shoulder. Now, take your right hand on top of your head and press it hard on both the sides. Now, take your hand on the backside and put your head on the backside and press it hard on the backside. Now, the same

hand now has to go on top of yourself head and has to be stretched like this on top of your head and press it hard, the scalp seven times. That’s all. You have to do. Now, you have to close your eyes.

So, here we go. Start our process of Kundalini awakening. But to begin with, I have to tell you again, that you have to be in a very pleasant mood and you have to forgive yourself. And you have not to feel guilty at all. That’s the first condition for anything. If you have taken drugs, alright finished. If you are an alcoholic, finished. Doesn’t matter. Anything you have done, done. Finished. That’s past and at this time it doesn’t matter. At this time it does not matter. Just forgive yourself. Now close your eyes.

Put both the legs parallel to each other. Now, take the right hand to your heart. On the heart, put this hand properly. And here resides the Spirit so please, ask me a question in your heart very intensely. Very important question. You can call me Shri Mataji or you can call me Mother. Mother. Am I the Spirit? Ask this question three times.

Now take this hand in the upper part of your abdomen on the left-hand side and press it. This is the centre of your mastery. So, the second question comes in. As you are the Spirit, you are your master too. Now, ask me again three times with full confidence. Mother. Am I my own Master?

Now, take down your right hand in the lower part of your abdomen, on the left-hand side. Here you have to ask six times because this centre has got six petals. Here you have to ask because I cannot force on you. So, please ask me, Mother. May I have the pure knowledge. This is the knowledge of the technique. Mother. May I have the pure knowledge. Just press it hard. Hmm. Six times. With this, the Kundalini starts moving upward now.

Now, at this time you have to co-operate with your Kundalini. Sit straight. Put your both the legs apart from each other. Now, be careful. Take your right hand on the upper part of your abdomen, on your left-hand side and press it hard. Now, here with full confidence, you have to say, Mother. I am my own Master. Say it with full confidence. Please say it, Mother. I am my own Master. Now, raise your right hand. This is to be said ten times. Press it hard. Say ten times first.

Now, raise your right hand to your heart. Here again, with full confidence you have to say twelve times the most important thing and the only truth i.e. Mother. I am the Spirit. Please say it ten times. With all confidence in yourself. Mother. I am the Spirit. Please keep your eyes shut. Don’t keep them open. Just keep them closed. Mother. I am the Spirit. Till I tell you, keep your eyes shut. Mother. I am the Spirit. Now, raise your, this you have to say twelve times properly.

Now, raise your right hand on to your neck in the corner that is formed by your neck and your shoulder and turn your face towards the right. Turn your head towards the right. Press it hard. Here is the centre which is always blocked when we feel guilty. God is the ocean of Love and

grace but he is above all the ocean of forgiveness. So, please say sixteen times here. Mother. I am not guilty. Please say sixteen times and if you still feel, you can say it 108 times to punish yourself. Sixteen times. Mother. I am not guilty at all. With full confidence.

Now, take your hand on your forehead across and press it hard. Now, here you have to say, Mother. I forgive everyone. Now, some of you all the time say, that it’s very difficult Mother, to forgive. But whether you forgive or do not forgive, it’s a myth. You do not do anything in both the cases. But when you say, I forgive, you do not play into the wrong hands. So, just say Mother. I forgive everyone.

Put back your hand. You have to say it from your heart. Now, put back your hand on the backside of your head. And allow your head to rest on it. Here just for your satisfaction, you can say, Oh. Divine. If I have done any mistakes, please forgive me. Just for your satisfaction. Don’t start counting your mistakes, please. Push back your head. From your heart, how many times is not the point. Push back your head back. Keep your eyes shut. Terrible heat.

Now, take your hand on top of your head. Open it out fully. Press only your fontanelle, press your palm only in the centre on the fontanelle bone area that is the soft bone which you had in your childhood. Press it hard. Press the scalp and make it move seven times. Please keep your eyes shut. Press it hard. (Shri Mataji blowing into the microphone seven times) Now, take down your hand.

Open your eyes slowly. Put your right hand towards me. Like this, like this, right hand, like this. Right hand like this and with your left hand you see on top of your head. You can bend your head a little and see for yourself if there is a cool breeze coming out of your head. Bend it. Bend. Bend your head. And it could be little, some people get it here.

Haan. Now, change the hand. Left hand towards me, with the right hand you see. Now, bend your head and see for yourself. Hmm. Now, again change once more. Right hand towards Me and see with the left hand. Hmm. Now, raise your hand up in the air and just ask a question in your heart. Is this the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost? Is this the Brahma Chaitnya? Is this the love of God that we are feeling as cool breeze? Ask any question three times in your heart. Put your head up towards the sky.

Haan. Now, take down your hands. Just see for yourself. Watch me without thinking. You can do it. Hmm. You were supporting a wrong person(Shri Mataji laughing) I knew this would don’t matter. Later on. The divine you see judges you very much. (In Hindi language) Aa Raha hai dhanda? Cool is coming in your hands? Great.

Now those who are getting cool in your hands or on top of their heads, please raise both the hands. Those who are getting, both the hands. Those who are getting the cool breeze. Both the hands. Those who are getting a cool breeze in their heads or on their hands. Please raise both the hands. Good. Put it. Put it up. Put it up. Don’t down. If you aren’t feeling it doesn’t matter.

See, how many have got it. Alright, put them down. Despite all the trouble (in Hindi language- Sardarji. Aap ko nahin hua Kya? Haan? Arey Bhai paar utar Gaye sant Jana Rey? Kyon bhai aap ko kyon nahin hua? Chalo. Haath karo meri taraf. Hua nahin? Aaya nahin dhandak haath mein sar mein? Aa gayi na? They have got it. Arey Sardarji. Logon ka hi toh kaam Kar rahey Hain. Nanak Saheb ka hi toh kaam Kar rahey Hain. Unhone hi toh kaha hai. Hain na baat?) (Translation of Hindi words said by Shri Mataji- She is addressing a Sikh Indian man and enquiring if he is feeling the cool breeze in his hands or head and also telling him the in Sahaja yoga we are doing what Guru Nanak has talked about)

They know this. They know this very well. Haan. May God bless you all. Now, what is to be done? How to maintain it? And how to keep it up? And how to master is the point. You must master it. Some people haven’t felt it I know. Some people haven’t felt. Doesn’t matter. You were opening your eyes, closing your eyes. You see, that’s not the way. Intensely you should do. Alright. Those who haven’t got it should not worry. Those who have got it are very good.

They should, all of them can come to a programme they are having. What they call a workshop where individually they will attend to you. You don’t have to pay any money whatsoever. That’s a fact. You don’t have to pay any money whatsoever. And there could be one or two persons. As Christ has said, Beware of the murmuring souls. But here people are over conscious of them I think. So, it has done good to so many and will do good to so many of you. What it does to you first of all that you feel extremely peaceful, extremely peaceful. And then you develop this thoughtless awareness.

(Shri Mataji pointing towards a gentleman in the audience) You didn’t feel sir? You didn’t feel? You. No? Surprising. I thought you will get it because you are so much there. (Pointing to someone else in the audience) What about you? You too didn’t feel? You feel it. (Shri Mataji laughing) You are absolutely gone into that. Haan. It’s good. It’s very enjoyable. You’ll sleep very well tonight and then you come and see for yourself, What powers you have. What glory you have.What peace you have.

We talk of peace, peace, peace, peace. It is not outside. Peace has to be within. When the people will have peace within then they will be peaceful. And there can be some people who take time. It’s all right. Doesn’t matter. Little time but one should work it out assiduously and with humility. One should not aggress for that. By aggressing, you don’t get it. It has to work out, is the point. There might be something wrong with you or which can be corrected very easily. So, may God bless you. Despite the whole thing, I am thankful that you all came and you got your realization. And I hope next time we won’t have this problem in Adelaide. (Shri Mataji is laughing and bowing to all)

(Shri Mataji indicating to someone in the audience and speaking in the Hindi language) Ek in ko realization den. This gentleman. I think he should get it in no time. This gentleman here. Can you see that? Now, see he can give realization. These Sahaja Yogis can give you realization. You get out, i mean some people who haven’t got realization can get out and they can give you

realization. Now, they have got the light. They can give you realization. You can give realization. Alright. Please if you don’t mind if you can just go there?

Anybody else who wants realization hasn’t got it should come on this side. And they will work it out for you. Anybody who hasn’t felt it? There is nothing to feel funny about it. Some people might not have got it. Is she alright? She got it? This lady. You got your realization? I am happy. This one? This lady here. Did you feel the realization? Haan. Good. Very good. What about you? No? No. Ño. Just see her. She is not sure. Can you tell from there? (Shri Mataji speaking in the Hindi language- In ko Jara dekhiye dono ko) These two are here. Just see them.

In any case, I would like to shake hands with you so, forget it. Last time they were these ‘Born Again’. They brought Bible to hit me. Can you believe it? (laughing) You see, I am against the feminist movement, that’s why they are angry. (A yogi removing Mike placed before Shri Mataji so that she can get up whenever she wants)

Shri Mataji: Has she got it? Has she got it? Eh? Just try on her.

Stevens talking to Shri Mataji: (unclear) We worked on her. She wasn’t sure.

Shri Mataji: No. no. no. no. There isn’t anything. Shouldn’t doubt it. (Speaking in Hindi language- khoob joron sey as Raha hai) doing very well. You should bring your children. Should have brought them. Children are the best. They get it very fast. Now, this gentleman. Hello. What’s your name? (Telling Stevens) Give him realization. (Addressing the gentleman) Just come along. Must give him. He was supporting a wrong case, that’s why. (Shri Mataji laughing) just laugh it out. Now, joy n joy n joy. So, Adelaide has some great seekers also, I must say. Some very great seekers.

Stevens talking to Shri Mataji: These three are here from Rajyoga.

Stevens: These three are here from Rajyoga. They were hoping to have a word with you.

Shri Mataji: Doesn’t work out.

Stevens: I have tried.

Shri Mataji: They are right-sided. Very right-sided you see. They are like nuns. doesn’t work.

Stevens: I don’t know if they want or not. They were wondering if they could speak to you.

Shri Mataji: They can’t. They are on the right side. Rajyoga doesn’t work out.

Stevens: There is also television people still hanging outside. They might want to speak to you. Do you want to speak to them?

Shri Mataji: (laughing) What. I am really surprised at the television. Wasting their time with this nonsense. Why don’t they see these things and televise it and let people get it? You see, on the television, people can get realization.

Shri Mataji: (suddenly smiling at someone) Haan. Yes. Hello. (Someone not visible give some flowers to Shri Mataji) Thank you. Haan. Beautiful. (Shri Mataji smelling the flowers and then keeps them aside) So, I should go and talk to them. (Shri Mataji starts wearing her cardigan) Adelaide has a minimum number of people but very serious people. There is something great about Adelaide. Very nice people you see. And I think in the foundation you need some serious people also. Then, later on, it will grow.

Stevens: (passing from behind Shri Mataji’s seat) I’ll go and see which way to go out.

Shri Mataji: Haan. I would.

Shri Mataji: (Three people come on the stage before Shri Mataji, she smiles up to them) Haan. What were you doing? You are Rajyogis?

Rajyogis: Yeah. From (not clear)

Shri Mataji: Oh. God. (Shri Mataji accepting the flowers from them) Thank you. So, what is it? Want to get your realization or not?

Rajyogis: We have got realization.

Shri Mataji: No. You haven’t. You haven’t got it I tell you. You have to feel a cool breeze in the hand.

Rajyogis: We feel love in the heart.

Shri Mataji: Eh? Pardon? Who is?

Rajyogi: Pyar?

Shri Mataji: Pyaar Kya? Pyaar (Pyar is Hindi words for love) is in the heart. Is in the heart. Everybody says that. Saying is not the point. Must work. Love must work. Must act. Act. Act, you see. Unless and until you are connected with that divine love, you cannot act. It acts. Sitting down here you can act with that. You see. This is the thing. Just believing that we have love doesn’t work out. Must act.

One of the lady Rajyogis: We must get experience

Shri Mataji: Beg your Pardon? Experience it. That’s the point I was saying and you see, that’s what it is. We don’t have anything. And the experiences of the, as described by Adi Shankaracharya. Adi Shankaracharya has described it as (words in the Sanskrit language) Saleelam Saleelam, the cool breeze. It’s all described in our Puranas and all that. But in the Brahmakumaris, I don’t think they tell you all about it.

The man from the Brahmakumaris: Have you heard (unclear)

Shri Mataji: Yes I have heard. I have heard. But I see. But doesn’t work out. I think you have to have simple self-realization first. That’s very important. It’s very right-sided. Brahmakumaris are very right-sided according to us.

The man from the Brahmakumaris: You think so? What is that?

Shri Mataji: It’s more on the right side. Is more intellect and things like that. And it has to come to the centre. It has to come to the centre. I have met many people who are from Brahmakumaris. But somehow I feel they should try to understand also, that’s it’s all, for one thing, is to become self-realized. It’s important and that you must get. But that is not what you think. It’s not that. It’s the thing that you get and on your Central Nervous System, you must know. You must get it on your Central Nervous System. See now, your faces are very red. Vishuddhis are not alright. This centre is not alright. Faces are very red for normal. You have to be very normal people. Extremely normal. In normal life, you have to live like Christ lived like everybody lives. There is no abnormality needed at all. To be absolutely normal life.

The man from the Brahmakumaris: What do you mean by normal life? Worldly people?

Shri Mataji: Worldly people. You should live like worldly people. Actually, we have no place for sanyasa in Sahaja Yoga. We don’t believe in sanyas.

The man from the Brahmakumaris: Brahmakumaris is in the family path.

Shri Mataji: Yes. But the difference is that we believe in the experience of realization and the manifestation of it. That we should be able to raise the Kundalini. If you can raise the Kundalini, give realization and you are master of that, then you are a Sahaja Yogi. That’s the point is. (Brahmakumaris, two women and one man are leaving) Think it over. Give it a thought. Alright. Think it over. Think it over. May God bless you. Thank you. Thank you.

Sahaj Yogi: Shri Mataji. This ABC lady is quite sensible about these crazy people and she would like to come back to the house and in a very quiet atmosphere, to talk with you.

Shri Mataji: ABC? Who’s that?

Sahaj Yogi: They are from 7.30 reporters.

Shri Mataji: Others rest of them have got?

Sahaj Yogi: There are some waiting in front talking to people who are going out. We have arranged for them to meet you (unclear)

Shri Mataji: First send the Sahaj Yogis to tell them we have got realization. Pretending. First the Sahaja Yogis.

Shri Mataji: (speaking in the Hindi language the Indian lady) Ho Gaya tum. Tum ko thanda aaya key nahin? Aaa Gaya. Achha. Kya naam hai tumahara? Khush Raho. Khush Raho.

Indian Lady: Mera naam Amar hai. Mein nayi aayi Hoon Sahaja Yoga mein.

Shri Mataji: Achha. Abhi aayen Hain.

Indian Lady: Bahut taras rahi thi mein aap ko dekhne ko. Kal jaongi to unsey baat karoongi.

Shri Mataji: Haan. Jaroor in logon sey milna. Yahan aana achha. Tumhare father mother Kahan Hain?

Indian Lady: Father mother sab Singapore mein Hain. Mein akeli Hoon.

Shri Mataji: Kaise?

Indian Lady: Pati Hain saath mein par woh Sahaj Yogi nahin hain.

Shri Mataji: (laughing) Chalo. Doesn’t matter. Ho jayega. Achha. Khush Raho.

(Indian lady goes and a foreigner lady comes and sits before Shri Mataji) English Lady: I am Robert’s mother. Nirmala’s mother (unclear)

Shri Mataji: (looking pleasantly surprised) Haan Ah. I know. You know what has happened. It’s a serious thing with Nirmala I don’t know with this woman. You could blame her for this. She is the one who has just brain-washed Nirmala and I have got a letter for her. I have got a thing from her. They brain-washed her and brain-washing made Nirmala so dominating, so dominating that Robert got into trouble. He has very bad pneumonia. When he came in the ashram I said such a bad right heart. I was quite worried and I said, Who’s that? He said, Robert. Robert. how did you get such a horrible thing? Ah. Then I realized, He had this pneumonia. I think Nirmal has to send him to Rome to get alright. I said what’s this? Why did

you learn this dominating stuff? Why were you dominating? It’s very wrong. I think she could have ruined his life and that’s the letter she had given.

Shri Mataji: (receiving another lady and shaking hands with her) How do you do Madam? How do you?

Yogi: She has come from Sydney to see you.

New lady: I have seen you in Sydney.

Shri Mataji: How is he? How are you?

Yogi: (not clear)

Shri Mataji: Ah. Good. Thank you. Look at these one or two persons here and there. They are just trying to trouble me. Doesn’t matter. It’s alright. But people got realization (Shri Mataji laughing) it’s all right. It’s alright. After all, a mother has to face all this.

Shri Mataji:(addressing another lady) Yes. Come.

Another lady: I come all the way from Iceland.

Shri Mataji: (looking surprised) Really? Imagine. From Iceland, you come. Baba. My God. (Laughing again) All the way from Iceland. I have to go to Iceland also sometimes. We have some friends in Iceland. There are about two thousand families. We have forgotten their names.No. No. It’s alright. Sometimes. Doesn’t matter.

One of the lady: (Sitting before Shri Mataji and speaking to her) It’s so frustrating because we wanted to hear you.

Shri Mataji: I know. It’s better you come and tell all these people outside. These television people should understand. They give so much importance to them. That’s why they talk. See, they are not.

Another lady: (not clear)

Shri Mataji: it’s a very sad thing. To give importance to the wrong type of people. And she told all lies. It was all lies. I mean, I never take money. What’s the question of taking money at all? Somebody might give some jewellery or something. I auction it out. I don’t touch anything. What is the need? I mean I am the one who is telling everyone not to take any money.

Lady: Well I am sure nobody is hearing them.

Shri Mataji: I don’t know. Why don’t they seek themselves? (Addressing a new arrival a man) What happened to you, my child? You didn’t get it?

The man: (not clear)

Shri Mataji: Why? You didn’t get it?

A man: Sorry.

Shri Mataji: You didn’t get your realization?

A man: (unclear)

Shri Mataji: I tell you what exactly, you didn’t forgive. You should forgive everyone.

A man: (unclear)

Man: (unclear)

Shri Mataji: You couldn’t forgive them?

Man: (unclear)

Shri Mataji: Alright. Forgive. Forgive everyone. No. No. Just forgive yourself and I’ll work it out. You just forgive. Don’t say all that. Don’t say anything to yourself. Just forgive yourself. Just forgive. What Christ has told you. On the cross he said, Forgive. He forgave and we have to forgive. Alright. Started?

Man: sorry?

It’s working? Can you feel it? Is it going now? Can you feel the cool breeze?

Man: Do it again. Do it again. (He laughs)

Shri Mataji:(laughing with him) Alright. Let’s see. Now. Is it. Now see. You got your realization. Forgive. Forgive. From your heart. Forgive yourself first of all. Forgive. Forgive. Forgive. Now forgive everyone. Forgive everyone. Forgive. Now? Got it?

Man: Yes. I can. God bless you. Thanks.

Shri Mataji: May God bless you.

A lady: (unclear) I had written a letter to you.

Shri Mataji: (looking towards a yogi) What?

Yogi: She was struck by lightning, Shri Mataji.

Shri Mataji: (looking shocked) Ah.

A lady: (unclear) I feel high and very very strong vibrations. But I feel it in the hands.

Shri Mataji: (Shri Mataji holding the lady close to her and speaking in her left ear for a few seconds) Aham Sakshat, Aham Sakshat Vishnumaya. Aham Sakshat Vishnumaya. Aham Sakshat Vishnumaya. Aham Sakshat Vishnumaya. Aham Sakshat Vishnumaya. Aham Sakshat Vishnumaya. Aham Sakshat Vishnumaya. Now? Let’s see. Feeling it? Not yet? Both the hands? Little bit? Started? You have to work on the photograph. Alright. (Unclear) Must forgive. Forgive.

Shri Mataji: (talking in Hindi language to new arrivals on stage ) Aiyee. Hello. You have got it. I can see that. Good. May God bless you. Nice. Nice. I came for you people really. Alright. Come and see them. Alright. (Talking to another new arrival and shaking hands) You come from where? From Fiji?

Lady: Sri Lanka.

Shri Mataji: Sri Lanka? Achha.Got all of you. Got your realization.

Another man: My sister you must be knowing.

Shri Mataji: Who?

Another man: Uma and Anuraag

Shri Mataji: What is their surname?

One lady: Natraja

Shri Mataji: Haan. She is your sister? It was nice meeting you really. I know. I know. He is a Veena player. I know, I know, I know him very well. Oh. She wrote to me. Is very good. He had got his realization and is really enjoying.

Shri Mataji: (addressing the lady she is working on) Now? Better. better. It’s started now. That’s the mantra you have to say, of Vishnumaya mantra you have to say. Alright. Started. (Looking up at someone arriving) Now, how are you? Got it.

Lady:(lady leaving from the stage) I go.

New arrival lady: I don’t know if I have got it.

Shri Mataji: You have. You have. You have I know. Sit down. (Working on her hand) Don’t doubt. It’s there. There. (Shri Mataji laughing) work it out.

Lady: I try hard.

Lady: I try hard sometimes.

Shri Mataji: You should not try. Just leave it. Just don’t try. You cannot try. Just leave it. Haan. Now. Now, Just say. Alright. That’s it. You shouldn’t try. This is a spontaneous thing. You cannot try.. Alright. (To another arrival) Let me see you got it.

New arrival: I got it.

Shri Mataji: You have got it. Really got it. She is got it in a big way.

New arrival: Thank you.

Shri Mataji: Yes thank you. Thank you. (Shaking hands with another arrival) Thank you. Sir found out. (laughing) now laugh. Laugh. And laugh. So simple. It’s so simple. So simple my children. Now, enjoy yourself. Enjoy is the point.

New arrivals: Thank you.

Shri Mataji: God bless you. After all the whole thing is all finished. Now, you all got it. (Talking to someone else) May God bless you. So good. So beautiful. Addressing the audience) You want to take photograph? Alright. May God bless you. (Shaking hand with some new arrival) So, now. What’s the matter?

Lady: I was reading about you. And you just arrived in Adelaide suddenly. I was reading about you.

Shri Mataji: It just works spontaneously, isn’t it.

Lady: Of course. I think my Kundalini was partly raised and it is going to drive me a bit mad. (unclear) my husband.

Shri Mataji: Oh. Really. Who did that?

Lady: Patrick (unclear)

Shri Mataji: Oh. Baba. They shouldn’t do like that. (unclear) They ruined you completely.

Lady: Sorry?

Shri Mataji: They can’t do it. Must have an authority to do it.

Shri Mataji: Who is this Patrick?

Lady: He is a spiritual leader.

Shri Mataji: Oh Ba. it’s not good. Very bad. (Shri Mataji addressing a yogi among the audience) Rustom. Don’t go to these people. Horrible. They take money for that. (Shri Mataji laughing and talking to a Sahaja yogi standing on her right side behind her chair) Done nothing. So, we got very nice people later on. And so many have got realization. The lady has gone now. She was making all false allegations. This is, I mean I have never heard about these.

Rustom: Ji Haan Shri Mataji.

Shri Mataji: (speaking in Hindi language Isko Dekho Jara Kundalini iski) some fake leader has done it. (Shri Mataji talking to another new lady) Alright. Good.

Lady: Alright.

Yogi: Shri Mataji they came to ashram nearly one year ago and got their realization.

Shri Mataji: Now it’s confirmed. Alright. God bless you.

Another lady: Just wanted to say Hello. Welcome to Adelaide. It’s nice meeting you.

Shri Mataji: (laughing) it’s alright. It’s a joke. And It’s all falsehood. The main thing is that it’s all falsehood so I didn’t know whether to laugh or say something. But it’s a fact. You see, when somebody, something goes wrong. Somebody frustrated, they try to behave like that. It’s a wrong thing to behave. You should try to be more peaceful and see for yourself and not to just get into problems, isn’t it? Because she could not say anything to us. I mean what was wrong with us. I mean nothing with us. Maybe, somebody might have dominated her, I can’t say that.

But that doesn’t mean that the whole of the Sahaja Yoga is like that. Some people can dominate you. It’s alright.

Yogi: A cup of tea Shri Mataji.

Shri Mataji: Later on. Nice to meet you. A smile is the most beautiful thing that I want to see. God bless you. (to another visitor) Alright. So. You got it. Despite all the problems. Don’t you worry. Don’t you worry. May God bless you.

Part 2 – Interview of Shri Mataji

Interviewer: Expect your teachings, your philosophy, more than other countries.

Shri Mataji: Yes. That’s true. For example, Austria. Austria is very good, England. And I would say, the best is Italy. Best is Italy. And then the second best would be Australia I would say. I don’t know how to compare, but so many countries like that But in India, of course, they know what it is. So I have thousands and thousands of people who got realization.

Interviewer: (unclear) In India there are so many people who are in need of some sort of a hope, that you would have a big influence on them. Is that the way you see it, that you have a very very large population, a lot of people looking for hope.

Shri Mataji: Yes. Apart from you see. Once you get realization, you see this problem of population is solved. You see, a person becomes very dynamic. They become very creative. They start getting dynamic. They improve financially also. All of them have improved financially, everyone. So, it’s a thing of the energy that is within us which we have not used. Which comes into use and we become dynamic.

Interviewer: You are very happy soul.

Shri Mataji: (laughing) Yes I am. That’s what. Sometimes they don’t like to see me very happy because they think I am ignorant. But why I am happy I’ll tell you. I have great hopes. I am sure this world is going to be a beautiful place. That’s why I am so happy.

Interviewer: Sorry. You would be.

Shri Mataji: I am happy because I know now the world is going to be a very very happy place for all of us to live very happily.

Interviewer: But you do say there are a lot of useless people in the world. What do you do with those useless people?

Shri Mataji: I don’t know what to do with them because you see there is no room even in the hell. You see, I don’t know where will they go. They might hang in the limbo or something like that (Shri Mataji laughing) you can say. But why don’t they see, what is their use? Why they have come on this Earth?

Interviewer: (Not clear)

Shri Mataji: They don’t want to think. They might. You see some people, some people take after the multitudes. So, may be if there are many people who are realized souls, they can.

Interviewer and Sahaja Yogi not visible can be heard talking) You want to copy that letter? Give me a copy of that. It was a very short Interview. Thank you.

Shri Mataji: Yes. Please.

(Some people not visible can be heard talking next to Shri Mataji)

Shri Mataji: Yes. I can hold it if you like.

Lady interviewer: Oh no. It’s Alright.

Shri Mataji: Alright.

Lady Interviewer: How do you feel about tonight’s meeting? To your satisfaction?

Shri Mataji: I am alright. You see, this doesn’t stop me from giving realization. Most of them have got realization tonight. But you see, it shows that people can go very low sometimes. Doors of Sahaja Yoga are open to everyone. Even to a convict, or a criminal, all kinds of people come in. And we don’t also find out, what sort of a life they had in the past. Forget the past. Forget the past. But sometimes they come from a very complicated life and then they show that thing. It’s alright. Doesn’t matter. It’s not so important. But one has to have some civil ideas. That when you are in a meeting, allow me to speak. I would have asked her the questions later on, given her full chance but she wouldn’t allow me to speak. And she made all false, absolutely false allegations which has no meaning.

Like the first thing, she says, that somebody gave me ten thousand dollars. What do I care for ten thousand dollars? It has no meaning to me at all. I mean doesn’t matter ten thousand dollars. I must have spent much more than that, much much more for Sahaja Yoga because I think it’s very important. For me, that’s the most important thing. Why should I take money? What’s the use? What’s the use of money to me? And I am the one talking from the top of the mountains, that you should not give. Maybe, some people might have given some jewellery as she said, so called. You see, all of that we auction. We auction it. Nothing I took. Everything

belongs to me whatever I have. So, it’s a wrong idea to talk like this when others are sitting, anxiously waiting for a very important thing in their life which is self-realization.

Lady Interviewer: (unclear) the friend of her’s who died (unclear)

Shri Mataji: No, it’s wrong. She should tell us the name of the person first of all. Nobody said they are evil people, nobody. Evil word we don’t use in Sahaja Yoga. That’s not the way we are. We don’t tell them like that but maybe see somebody like her might have said to her. I don’t know must be in the group someone maybe like her might have said it. But this word we are not supposed to use at all, such words to anyone. Now She says he died. I asked her the name. She wouldn’t tell the name of the person who died. And then she says somebody has given me ten thousand dollars. Whose that person? She didn’t tell me the name of that person either. So, this is very ambiguous things to say.

Lady Interviewer: (unclear) she said she gave you everything she had. She was cleaning floors, she was doing all things like that.

Shri Mataji:(unclear) Men also do in Sahaja Yoga. You see, there is nothing like() Men also clean daily in their own ashrams and they have to do it. Actually, she was staying with a person where a lady was leader herself. And there all ladies were doing like this. But she has ruined somebody’s life by telling her that you must dominate your husbands. Must dominate. And by domination, this fellow got a horrible type of pneumonia. And he was going to die. But I didn’t want to say all these things. After all, if she has no brains you see it’s all right, but I shouldn’t say all those things. There is a letter about that, that she did all these things and that’s why they said (unclear) But she was teaching people that you must dominate.

Teaching this leader also you must dominate. This is our right to dominate. Why did they dominate us? She is sort of a feminist woman an extreme type of a feminist. And we don’t have feminist and all these things. What we have is normal people, who love each other, who want to live with each other. You see when you marry you should live like a wife or a husband not like quarrelling all the time for your rights, duties this and that.

Lady Interviewer: How do you see the role of the wife?

Shri Mataji: No. I just say that there are two wheels on a chariot. Alright. One on the left one on the right. Now, the thing is that right and the left are equal but they are not similar. That’s the point. They are equal but not similar. And if a woman tries to be a man it’s a wrong thing. Or a man tries to be a woman is a wrong thing. Now, the thing is woman loves to have a home and homemaking is her own personal qualities and all that. She should look after the home. There’s nothing wrong in it. It’s a very good thing, a very satisfying thing. Now, I am myself a very home-loving person. I have got grandchildren. I have got my daughter married. I have a very big social life as you know my husband is the Big Boss there, so I have to attend many parties and

all that. Everything I do but I do also Sahaja Yoga. But I don’t feel low in any way in doing my household duties, on the contrary, I enjoy.

Lady Interviewer: (unclear)

Shri Mataji: It’s alright. It’s alright. Go ahead. Arey Just put on the left lights, please. Just move out because there should be light. You be comfortable. I think comfortable. (unclear) that side. Yes now. Come along.

Lady Interviewer: What about the future of your sect? Where do you see the group’s future lie?

Shri Mataji: This is not a sect. We don’t call it a sect. It’s a movement within yourself. It’s an evolutionary process. As a fish came out of the water and became a reptile, in the same way, human beings have to become something more. It’s a movement within and that is something so natural and absolutely a living process. It has nothing to do with any sect. We don’t have any membership. Don’t have any payments for that nothing of that kind. Anybody who wants to try should try. And as long as they want they can stay or go away. But if somebody tried to trouble us, then we have to say you go away. Because we asked her to go away, that proves at least we wanted her to go away. She didn’t go away. If she didn’t like it, why didn’t she go?

Lady Interviewer: But what about the future of the movement? Where do you see that?

Shri Mataji: I am very hopeful. I am very happy about it. I think a day will come when many people will be realized souls and the kingdom of God is about to come.

Lady Interviewer: But So many movements come and go. I mean.

Shri Mataji: That’s it. I have told about them openly. I have told about them. From 1970 I am been shouting. I have also told them in America on the television, that AIDS is going to come. The way you are behaving. Give up these ideas, it’s not proper. But they wouldn’t like me. And they were very angry with me especially in San Francisco they got so angry. What are you talking? We don’t want to advertise for you. You see this is the trouble is. They didn’t like it at that time when I told them because as a mother I have to tell the truth. Isn’t it? They didn’t like it when I told them you shouldn’t do these wrong things. But it happened that way.

Lady Interviewer: Hmm. Thank you very much for (unclear)

Shri Mataji: May God bless you. What is he doing now? From that side? Alright. Alright. Just to see.

Lady Interviewer: Where are you going from here?

Shri Mataji: Here I am going to …for a day because I am having a very hectic time. And then I’ll be going via Hong Kong to Bombay. I am also building a house for my husband in Poona. So, in between, I am seeing the house then coming out doing my work. Lots of things are to be done but in Sahaja Yoga, you don’t feel tired. And you become really dynamic. Really don’t feel tired. Feel so dynamic and so happy that you don’t feel that. You can do so many things together. Now, I am sixty-five years of age, you can imagine.

Lady Interviewer: I can (smiling) Thank you very much.

Shri Mataji: Thank you. May God bless you. (Addressing) now which one is going to come?

Yogi: We have CBIBC.

Shri Mataji: Alright. They are still waiting here. May God bless you. (Shri Mataji getting up to leave)

Yogis sitting in the audience: We have been really concerned about you tonight, Shri Mataji.

Shri Mataji: They are real ones, good ones. That’s what Adelaide is. You see, there are very good people here and some stupid also (laughing)

Shri Mataji shoes can be seen and voices of Sahaj Yogis can be heard (unclear)

Shri Mataji ready to leave and standing for a long time in the middle path among the seats for the audience and talking to a man, who is sitting in presence of Shri Mataji, trying to clear his Agnya and giving her valuable advice.

Shri Mataji is seen finally leaving with a smile on her face and talking to all the people and yogis present there.

Leave a Reply
Logged in as Prashant handge. Edit your profile. Log out? Required fields are marked *

Comment *


Copyright © 2026 Nirmala Vidya Amruta. All Rights Reserved. Privacy | Terms of Use | Amruta is supported by the WordPress Multilingual Plugin. | oska.dev
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
About WordPress
Nirmala Vidya Amruta
Hi, Prashant handge
Search