SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 1988-07-13
TALK: To be baptized is to feel the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost out of your head
LOCATION/EVENT: frankfurt-germany
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:21:05
CHARS: 45272
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
Post navigation
Previous post:
How ego creates a problem between us and the truth?
Next post:
To be baptized is to feel the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost out of your head
How Spiritual Transformation Takes Place?
Frankfurt (Germany)  View Map
Wednesday, July 13th, 1988 
Leave a comment
Public Program
Transcript (English) – Draft
English
German
Audio
Video DP-RAW
Frankfurt, Germany
60'
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English

1988-07-13 Public Program, Frankfurt Germany DP-RAW, 209′
Show Video Details 
If you have more precise location information for this event, please write to help@amruta.org. 
This page is also available on the Learn Sahaja Yoga website. We encourage you to share it widely to spread Sahaja Yoga knowledge! 
IMPORTANT NOTICE: This text has NOT been verified. Would you like to help us verify? For more info, please click here. Please note that the text may be incomplete and contain errors, so caution is advised; we recommend cross-checking it with the original audio/video material. 


13 July 1988
Public Program
Frankfurt (Germany)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
1988-0713 Public Program, Frankfurt, Germany

I bow to all the seekers of Truth. Human beings start seeking in the beginning they were seeking protection, security and then once the society started, they started seeking money. Some of them started seeking power. That is how we have developed two types of political institutions we will call as democracy and also as communism. But when they reached certain state of satisfaction or frustration, they started seeking something else. And they did not know what they were seeking but they were trying to seek the Truth. Seekers of Truth are a special category of human beings. They may not be very successful in life. They may not be very rich; they need not be very religious but inside them there was a great urge to seek the Truth. Also, the knowledge that we have out of our science and other enterprises is the knowledge of the tree. But we did not have the knowledge of the roots. So, they wanted to find out where are the roots. If you read certain newspapers and certain account of day-to-day happenings in modern times, you every day gets a shock, and you don’t understand how you go into terrible tensions and pressures of life. All these things end up into all kinds of physical, mental, emotional problems. And when we try to find out in the spiritual area the solutions for them unclear() even worst because the people who are talking about spirituality are themselves dishonest. Because of all these happenings, the seeking unclear(gross) much violent. Then people take to all kinds of things that are possible under the unclear(). But the truth if you have to discover, you have to know that truth we know is on our central nervous system. That is whatever you know through your senses is the Truth for you. For example, you are seeing the flowers here, everybody is seeing the flowers though they know it’s a Truth, there are flowers here. In the same way if you hear the music, you all know that there is music, and you can all feel it, hear it in your ears the music. In our evolution as human beings we have achieved a lot of things much more than that of animals. For example, a dog or a horse can pass through any kind of a dirty lane without feeling the dirt or the feeling of the bad smell. But the human beings cannot. So, there is a kind of a new awareness in a human being compared to an animal. Still, you have to say that we do not know the absolute Truth. If you been to somebody who is very sweet to talk and tries to persuade good things, you cannot make out if the person is trying to deceive you or is truth. It’s a relative world behavior. And we haven’t got the way of knowing the Absolute Truth. So, this urge comes into us when we want to know the Absolute Truth, but it is not for many human beings this feeling of knowing the Absolute Truth exists. They are not of that category, or they are not of that level to see that they have to find out something beyond. So, whatever you have heard just now about the subtle energies within you and the subtle system within you has to be understood like a scientist with an open mind. You have to find out whether it is a Truth or not and then accept it as Lord but not to accept or take for granted whatever I may say. Now as it has been explained to you that there is a subtle system that exists within us. This exists in all of us and the power of Kundalini which is the power of pure desire within us also exists in all of us. It is all within us this power is our own. Only thing is that we are not yet awakened to that new awareness where we could know what we are. That is possible very easily it can be done awaken this power within ourselves. It’s nothing really serious, it’s nothing really difficult. It’s just like this instrument we connect it to the mains. As this instrument is already there, and you are a computer which is already programmed. You are just to be put to the mains. But the knowledge is so fantastic and so unique that it is very difficult to believe that such a thing exists within us that it can worked out this way. That it is the easiest thing to work. In these modern times, we cannot believe that such a thing can happen. But we are fantastic. If you take supposing a television in an Indian remote village and tell them that you can see all the pictures in it, they won’t believe. But if you put it to the mains, they are amazed to see that the little box we call these wonderful things. In the same way when your machinery starts working by this Yoga, by this connection to the mains, you are amazed at yourself that how many capacities you have, how many qualities you have and how dynamic you are with all that you are so peaceful and so happy. So, one has to understand that talking about all these instruments is not going to help. If I have to put on the light in this hall, I have to just press the button. But if I have to give you the whole history of electricity and all that it means about it, you will say how do we know. So, this has to happen in a way that you should first get the light. What is the aim of our life? Why are we human beings? What have we to be after this? You have to be the Spirit. Because the Spirit-the Spirit is the source of joy, the Spirit is the source of knowledge, and the Spirit is the source of attention. When with this happening, the Spirit starts emitting its own light into our attention then your attention becomes powerful? Tremendous transformation takes place. You become absolutely free from temptations. You drop out all your habits and all the things that enslave you. You become a peaceful person within, and you become so powerful that you can give realizations to others. It has worked in many countries. Only Japan is the place where it is working that is good, I must say it. Which is like surprising why it should not work in Japanese in the same way as it is working in other countries. If you are the seekers of Truth then it will work no doubt. As a result of that all your diseases drop. Sahaja yoga has cured so many diseases, all kinds of diseases have been cured through sahaja yoga and there are two doctors who have now got the MD from Delhi university because they did the research on sahaja yoga. But it is such a miraculous happening that people when they get cured, they are amazed that without taking any medicines, without going to the doctors, without spending money how have they been cured of such horrible diseases. But actually, when this power rises and pierces through this seventh chakra here then what happens that the whole system gets nourished by this all-pervading power which is a Divine love. As you say in the medical terminology that the para sympathetic nervous system starts activating. It automatically gives you the balance, it gives you the nourishment, it gives you the joy, and that witness state by which you solve your problems in a remarkable manner. So, in your awareness you develop three types of new dimensions. The first to develop is the collective consciousness that is on your fingertips you can feel the centers of other people. You can also feel your own centers. In Quran Mohammad sahib has said that of Kaiama which is resurrection your hands will speak. These happenings are described in all the scriptures. And is said that you have to have self-realization. That you have to have a second birth. But it is not some kind of artificial certificate we can have that this is my second birth. When it happens you develop the first part as I told you is uncelar(realm) of collective consciousness then you develop a state which we call as a thoughtless awareness where you go beyond thoughts. You develop the capacity to redeem others and to comfort them. So, this is the epitome of your evolutionary process. Ultimately you have to achieve that. I am sorry in Frankfurt I am here for only one day-today. But we have a very good center here where people go and consult them after your self-realization. I tried three times to come to Frankfurt but somehow it never materialized. This is the first time I am here and that to for such a short time. It is important that we have to decide that it’s a very important moment way to see that jump that breakthrough which is promised to us. Of course, it’s a living process so it is spontaneous, and you can’t pay for it. And you don’t have to put in much efforts also.

I would like you to ask me some questions if you have, some sensible questions. Because I have not come here to take anything from you. I have come here to give you what is your own. What is your own property. So, you need not be aggressive with me. May God bless you.

Yogi: Shri Mataji, how to prepare unclear()

Shri Mataji: No preparation is needed. This question is beautiful that’s sufficient. The beautiful question, and that means you are already prepared. 

Yogi: unclear()

Shri Mataji: No nothing is needed. There is nothing to worry about all these things. You have finished with that now and quite a lot in your last life and this life. Now time has for you to get it. 

Yogi: unclear()

Shri Mataji: I do not do anything. You will do it. Then you become your own master, you can cure yourself. Not only that you will remove your negative forces, but you will remove of others as well. 

Yogi: The question was Shri Mataji, from where did you learn? Who is your master?

Shri Mataji: I had no master. I was born with this knowledge. Now I would say that I wouldn’t tell you much about myself it is better you discover about me. See Christ said that he was the Son of God, which was the Truth, Absolute Truth. But they crucified him. I don’t want to get crucified for nothing. 

Yogi: He is asking why is your picture here Shri Mataji, why is it important?

Shri Mataji: if unclear (I may check) if there has any objection for that? This is not the way you are going to get your realization. This is absurd. If I say why there are flowers? Why there are everything? 

Yogi: Again, he is asking, what should we do to achieve self-realization?

Shri Mataji: You just wait for two minutes more. 

Alright. So now I think let us have our realization. Now those who do not want to have leave the hall. Because I cannot force on you. I cannot. There is not guarantee. If it works that’s great. If it doesn’t will have to try again tomorrow or day after. All those people who are here in Frankfurt who have got realization can give realization to you also. 

Let’s have it, I think.

Now one simple thing you have to do is to take out your shoes because you have to take the help of the Mother Earth, and also the tension on feet can be reduced by that. Please just take off your shoes. Out of at the very outsaid have to request one thing is that you shouldn’t be angry with yourself first of all. You should be pleasantly placed towards yourself. And not to feel guilty about anything. Forget the past. Present is important. Secondly, we have to know that I would like you to understand how to raise your own kundalini also later on. Because though the Kundalini will break through your fontanelle bone area no doubt. But still possibly it will go back to the problems where it has to attend. So, you have to understand all about it. And you have to understand the decoding of these informations you get on your computer. What is decoding and understanding, you have to spend some time with people who are already here and learn from them what does it mean. The meaning of everything. So now, we have to put our both the feet on parallel line each other because these two are different powers within us. Now the left-hand has to be stretched just like this, this is symbolically expressing your desire to get your self-realization. You have to be comfortable. You shouldn’t sit with a very stretch body or with a slouch. But in a normal way with a proper neck straight. So, I will show you how you will have to do it yourself after closing your eyes, but just now I will show you. First of all, you have to put your right-hand on your heart, please put on your heart. In the heart resides the Spirit. Now, you have to take this right-hand on to the upper part of your abdomen and press it on the left-hand side. Because this is the center of your mastery. And we are working everything on your left-hand side. So, press it hard a little. Now, take your right-hand and put it on the lower part of your abdomen on the left-hand side. Now raise your hand in the upper part of the abdomen again, because the lower part of the abdomen where you have put your hand is the center of pure knowledge. And when it starts working, the Kundalini starts moving upwards so, so now you have to put your right-hand in the upper part of your abdomen also to open it up. Ya ya this side left side. Left side. And again on the heart center. Then in the corner of your shoulder and your neck put this hand there and turn your head to your right. Now this center catches when you feel guilty. Now, stretch your hand in such a manner I mean put your hand across on your forehead and press it on both the sides like this. This is the center of forgiveness. Now take your right-hand on the back side of your head and put it back looking up. Now this is the center where you have to ask for forgiveness. Now stretch your hand like, stretch it like this and push back your fingers and put the centers of your palm on top of your fontanelle bone are which was a soft bone and bend your head. Push back your fingers. Now press it had and seven times you have to move. Clockwise you have to move it seven times. That’s all.

Now please close your eyes, you don’t have to open your eyes at all. You can even takeout your spectacles also. Till I tell you please don’t open your eyes. Because your attention has to go within. Alright, now you have to put your left-hand towards me. Put both the feet apart from each other. Please put like this, the simple way now listen listen, please open your eyes. Put the hand just like this on your lap, just on your lap just on your lap. And now, you start, if you have to go, please go because you should not disturb other people. Alright. So now please put this hand just like this on your lap on your lap, keep your fingers stretched. Now this hand has to go this way. Some people put it this way, no this way. So now, let us have it. Now you pleasantly placed towards yourself and close your eyes. 

Now put your right-hand on your heart. Here you ask me a very fundamental question without any diffidence: ‘Mother, am I the Spirit?’ ask this question to me, you can call me Mother or Shri Mataji whichever way you like. You ask this question three times please. This question is to be followed by another question, that when you are the Spirit, you are your Master. So now please put your right-hand in the upper portion of your abdomen on the left-hand side and press it hard and ask me a question three times: ‘Mother am I my own Master?’. Now please put your right-hand in the lower part of your abdomen and press it hard on the left-hand side. This is the center of pure knowledge of Divine laws. So you have to ask for pure knowledge, I cannot force on you because I respect your freedom. So please ask six times: ’Mother, please give me Pure Knowledge’. This center has got six petals, so you have to ask me six times. With this asking, your Kundalini starts moving upwards. Now to give Her a full way we have to slowly try to relax our upper centers. So now please put your right-hand on the left-hand side of your upper portion of your abdomen and press it hard. Here now you have to say with full confidence ten times: ‘Mother, I am my own Master’. Now the most fundamental truth is that you are the Spirit. So now raise your right-hand on to your heart and here with your full confidence say twelve times: ’Mother, I am the Spirit’. Now one has to know that the Divine is the ocean of love, compassion and bliss but above all it is the ocean of forgiveness and whatever mistakes you might have committed can be easily dissolved by that ocean. So, please forgive yourself and don’t feel guilty. So now put your right-hand on the corner of your between the neck and the shoulder press it hard and turn your head to the right by saying sixteen times: ‘Mother, I am not guilty’. Turn your neck to the right. Even then if you feel guilty better punish yourself by saying hundred and eight times. Now, please raise your hand to your forehead and press it on both the sides. And here you have to say from your heart: ‘Mother, I forgive everyone’. May be some of you might think that it is difficult but whether you forgive or don’t forgive, it’s a myth. But if you don’t forgive, then you play into wrong hands. Now, take this hand on the back side of your head and just put your head on it. For your own satisfaction alone, you just say: ’Oh Divine, if I have done any mistakes, please forgive me’ but don’t count your mistakes and don’t feel guilty. Now stretch your hand and put the center of your palm on top of your fontanelle bone area it was a soft bone, press it hard your scalp, push back your finger and move it seven times but I cannot force for your self-realization. You have to ask for it. So please say seven times: ‘Mother, May I have my self-realization?’. Press it hard. 

Now take down your hand please. Slowly open your eyes. Now put your right-hand towards me. Bend your head and see if there is a cool breeze coming out of your head. Now put again your left-hand towards me. Bend your head and see. Now see for yourself if you are feeling any cool breeze. Again, put your right-hand towards me and see for yourself. Push back both your hands and push back your head and ask a question three times: ‘Mother, is this the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost? Mother, is this the Chaitanya? Mother, is this the all-pervading power of Divine Love?’. Now, you see for yourself, you feel very relaxed. You feel very relaxed. 

Now, those who have felt the cool breeze from their head or in their hands please raise both your hands. Again repeat it. Oh, great most of you have felt it. May God bless you. Those who have felt or not felt can go to our center and can establish themselves. Those who want to meet me can also comedown I would like to meet them. Can you remove the pot? 

(Unclear discussion with Yogis)

Horrible he is, horrible, horrible, horrible. Unclear() He is a horrible fellow that guru maharaj. Don’t you worry unclear(), you will be alright. I know I know he is horrible. Will tell you how to get rid off all these problems right? 

Are you alright? Are you alright? Now alright? His catches are alright? He is alright. Hello what was the matter? Unclear() smiling together. Unclear() alright? Now satisfied?

How are you? You felt the cool breeze? May God bless you. May God bless you. You must come to the center. You become master. Next year when I come, I can see you as a master. 

(Unclear discussion with Yogis)

Yogi: She is feeling hot in her hands.

Shri Mataji: Alright, it will go away. Put one hand like this. No no, left-hand. Left-hand like this and right-hand towards me. Better now. Very relaxed now? No thoughts, just no thoughts. Cooler? Much cooler? You say: ‘Mother, come in my head’. Just say that. Uncelar()

Kaise hai beta (How are you son)? Theek hai (are you fine)?

Yahee hai (Is it she)? Acha hai ye to right side bahot is ko pakad gaye thee. Ab threek hai (She has catch on right side, now she is fine). Acha. Good. Theek chal raha hai?( Is everything fine?) unclear() kuch sahajayogonki madad karo unclear (Please help to some sahaja yogis). Yahee rehate ho? (Do you live here?) 

He is here, he is very old sahaja yogi. 

Another Yogi: I know him Shri Mataji. I know him from three years. 

Alright. Both of them will have you. 

Aake mila karo madad karna Acha? Khushee raho, jeete raho (come and meet and help them okey? Be happy and bless you). 

Aur Indians ko lavo…

Another yogi: Wo Sonu ka wife idaree hai (Sonu’s wife is here), Sonu brothers also in Frankfurt.

Shri Mataji: Who?

Another yogi: Sonu, Karan’s brother hai naa. 

Shri Mataji: Is he here?

Yogi: He is in Frankfurt. He works here. 

Shri Mataji: You got it? 

Yogi: He was in Munich Shri Mataji. He is a Sahja Yogi from Vienna Shri Mataji, a baby. We are all babies.

Shri Mataji: Now better? Cooler? The warmness did you feel now?

Yogi: She is a Sahaja yogi from Berlin Shri Mataji. Berlin.

Shri Mataji: Good, how are you? Alright? I will have to come to Berlin, no doubt. May God bless you, May God bless you. It’s all we, our own beauty. She is so sweet. Catches cold quite often? Put some ice on her liver. She will be alright. Alright. 

Are you better now madam? 

(Shri Mataji talking to some other person)

You been to some guru or something? 

Yogi: Babaji? 

Shri Mataji: who is this Babaji? 

Yogi: He is an Indian 

Shri Mataji: What an avatar? How can you have stomach trouble? 

Yogi: He says that he is absorbing energies from people Shri Mataji

Shri Mataji: No no not at all. Your guru is wrong. Absolutely wrong. He is not a good man. Now put your hand on your right side ya. Now put this hand towards me. Now you say: ‘Mother, I am my own Master’. Horrible guru you have. Keep your eyes open, watch me here. Now say: ‘Mother I am my own Master’. Say it ten times and forget Babaji of yours. 

Again, again, again, again, again, again, again, again. Now feeling the cool breeze? 

Anybody says if I have avatara, why do you believe such a person? They may say anything. They might be coming directly from jail. How will you know?

Anybody who is a real guru cannot anything to happen like this, don’t you know? 

If he is an avatara he is not even given realization, minimum of minimum a guru should do. 

Better now. Better better. Now have patience with you. 

Forget that guru of yours and come and see them, they will tell you how to get rid off him. Alright, don’t believe. Indians are very good at telling lies. They are very good at telling lies. But if same body says he is an avatara, you should not believe. Alright, you come and see him, he will cure your completely. And he will tell you how to cure others. 

Better now, better? Now better? 

Yogi: Still the same. 

Shri Mataji: Just the same? Not true. Is the same hot? 

How does this fellow know Babaji? 

Yogi: She is from Berlin.

Shri Mataji: Are you alright? I have to come to Berlin as unclear() Alright?

We have some programs there. We have to get some more people. 

Who has come for the first time? 

It’s cooler now. Is it cooler? 

Please put your right-hand on your heart and say: ‘Mother, please come in my heart’

Better? 

Haa, alright?

Have you feeling cooler now? 

Yogi: Still warm

Shri Mataji: Let it, let it go the heat

Say: ’Mother please come in my heart’

How are you? Alright? May God bless you. Now, try and learn everything about it he will tell you, you have to cure the hearts of many. Enjoy, enjoy yourself. 

Yogi: She did not feel it Shri Mataji

Shri Mataji: What work you do? 

Yogi: She is a gardener. 

Shri Mataji: Forgive, you have to forgive, you have to forgive. Just forgive. You had a guru or someone before? Pardon 

Yogi: She is a Baptized Shri Mataji

Shri Mataji: You are Baptist? You are baptized

Lady: I am baptized not Baptist

Shri Mataji: You are not a Baptist, you are baptized. In a catholic church? 

So you didn’t go to any unclear() to some person?

Yogi: Her friend is following guru maharaj

Shri Mataji: That’s why. Just look at, can you feel it? Whole body shaking. Can you feel in the stomach? See na, whole thing is shaking. See na, who the one who is suffering is your friend? From guru maharaj.

Yogi: He is not here Shri Mataji

Shri Mataji: Oh God, you got it so horrid. You have his photograph unclear()? Sure he is not here? He is gone away? Is he still your friend? Follows you? 

Lady: Not really unclear()

Shri Mataji: You should give him up. Absolutely or unclear() who is suffering. See you are better. Now please see that you get rid off all that and be alright. It can develop into serious trouble, it can develop into serious trouble. Unclear() come and see these people. They will tell you what is to be done. 

Unclear discussion

Shri Mataji: Now it’s better, quite a better. See you have to work it out. Alright? Don’t neglect. May God bless you. Get your friend also. Ask him to come. Alright? Both of you and get well. 

Lady: Okey, thank you.

Shri Mataji: Did you feel the cool breeze?

Lady: unclear()

Shri Mataji: Have you been following some guru?

Yogi: Ohmkarananda

Shri Mataji: Who is this one Ohmkara? Every time I find a new one somewhere unclear(), down, put your right-hand on your stomach. Let’s say one thing: forget about this Ohmkarananda and all these. They have a big big names, useless good for nothing that’s why you cannot get your realization. You just say one thing: ‘Mother, I am my own master’. Better? Are you feeling the cool breeze? Unclear(), ah, alright? Got it now. Forget all these nonsensical people. Now get to the reality. What’s your age?

Yogi: 66

Shri Mataji: It doesn’t matter, come and see them and they will tell you. You are my age can you believe this? Alright, come and see them and get rid of all these Ohmakrananda and Phalanananda all dhokanands. They take money from you and just unclear(), he don’t take money? He gives, how can you give all these problems? If he doesn’t take money, unclear() impossible I can’t believe it that he doesn’t take money. May not be with you but with others. How can it be? 

Another Yogi: She says he doesn’t take money. 

Shri Mataji: What will he do? How can he do otherwise? From where does he come? Hands are shaking, she should know that she is not well. Her hands are shaking, her body is shaking, her Kundalini is shaking. What is she saying? Unclear() but you see what I am to trying to tell her that I am your mother alright? So how will you say that if a guru is a guru to you? Alright? And how can he do this to you? 

If you are seeking a reality, then you come and get it and just establish it because you are seeking. Alright? Don’t get identify with some big big names. That has no meaning. 

Is she better now? The lady? What is she saying? Cool in the head? Good good good. You will be alright with unclear()

Felt the cool breeze? Been to some guru or something? 

Yogi: unclear (Hata yoga)

Shri Mataji: That’s all? Unclear()

Yogi: Shri Mataji, bist du Hata yoga (Shri Mataji, You are Hata yoga)

Shri Mataji: Ha, now unclear() you just tell her that, am I the part and parcel of the whole? Part and parcel of the whole. Gain, say it again, again alright? Feeling the cool breeze now? Feeling on the head also? 

Another Yogi: unclear() she has terrible cramps 

Shri Mataji: That’s the part of it (Hata yoga). That’s the part of it, move to the right too much.

Because you see just no discrimination at all. You see, cannot. You must be later, must be doing lot of exercises, thing .. see over physical., on the right-hand side, the movement is more on the right-hand side when you do too much physical exercises then you become a dry personality. You may become a unclear() you might become the uncelar(), now you do one thing: are you married? 

Yogi: Divorced 

Shri Mataji: Divorced? Now what I am trying to tell you is, now you forget all your sports go for a honeymoon with your husband. I will get you one. You forget all that. Alright? You forget all that nonsense. Then now better be., there is too much., no no, yes too much exercises. Hata yoga also must be understood in full extent. This is not scientific. Indiscriminate. There should be discretion, what you need is not Hata yoga. What you need is prem yoga. Is a bhakti. Bhakti-you better join them, they will tell you what is bhakti. Is there any music? unclear()

Yogis: She couldn’t feel it. 

Shri Mataji: You had a guru? 

Shri Mataji: Put your right-hand here on your stomach. Now, just say ten times: ‘Mother, I am my own master’. Say it from your heart. Again, better now? Feeling it or not? You just say it: ‘Mother, please come in my head’. Got it? Now forget that horrible fellow and they will tell you how to get rid of him alright? All of them are arrived here already. How are you now? 

Yogi: He is following this guru maharaj, this guru maharaj is abusing him, he is trying to unclear(), he is hacking him, he is doing all kinds of torture to him. Sexually he is abusing him. 

Shri Mataji: In dreams?

Yogi: In dreams but also it felt in reality 

Shri Mataji: In your childhood? 

Yogi: He is paining everywhere Shri Mataji, his teeth are paining, his chakras are paining, he destroyed his family Shri Mataji, he put him in a sort of a prison uncelar()

Shri Mataji: It was in reality?

Yogi: Yes Shri Mataji, in reality, he is having it in his dream, he is physically is not there but it is happening in his dreams. 

Shri Mataji: He never met you? 

Yogi: He met him twice Shri Mataji, but he appeared to him in a sort of a vision with same uncelar()

Shri Mataji: but as a person he met him?

Yogi: Two times Shri Mataji

Shri Mataji: You can be cured. You get cured completely alright? We can work it out, you must come and see them, they will tell you, you will be well alright? He can’t harm you. Alright, you sleep very well. Feeling relaxed now? Are you feeling relaxed? No he cannot, he cannot. I am very powerful. I will kick him back. Alright? You don’t worry, you come and see them. 

You didn’t come to me, you never came to me, 

Another Yogi: Two years ago Shri Mataji, when your first program was announced, he was one of them. 

Shri Mataji: Where was this? But he never came to you people, 

Another Yogi: In Frankfurt Shri Mataji, I met him after one week we had to leave Frankfurt so, may be unclear()

Shri Mataji: Alright, it doesn’t matter, alright, now don’t worry, whatever has happened has happened. No more unclear() now he is going to look after you. He will tell you what is to be done. Don’t you worry. Alright? Now I am not a master, I am your Mother. Alright? 

Yogi: This funny guy doesn’t allow him to go anywhere. 

Shri Mataji: Oh, you will be alright, don’t you worry, unclear() we teach you how to do it. We teach you how to do it. He will tell you what it to be done. Go, they will tell you what is to be done, then come. Now they will tell you, come along, now go, go there somebody should tell you, go ahead, they will tell you how to protect, and you go and see them, now, you must go and see them, alright? May God bless you.

Another Yogi: On the head she felt, she says in the hands she is feeling since longer time already. 

Shri Mataji: You have met me before, haven’t you? Never? 

Another Yogi: She is feeling energy in the hands.

Shri Mataji: No, energy is not the thing, you must feel the cool breeze. 

Another Yogi: She felt it on the head

Shri Mataji: Cool breeze? Now in the hand? Now the cool breeze? That’s it. No energies. Cool breeze. In fingertips? Alright, now you will see them, and they will teach you everything alright? You know the place where to go? 

So, how did you feel? In the head also you felt it? Very good, excellent, good. Come and see them alright? May God bless you. 

Been to some guru or someone? No one? Drugs. Little bit.

Yogi: he is smoking Shri Mataji.

Shri Mataji: You have a cool breeze now in your hand. Good. Try to progress further. It doesn’t matter, even if you are beginning now, it’s great. Alright? You come and see them. You know English? May God bless you. 

You felt the cool breeze? Put your hands to me. You been to some guru? 

Yogi: Rajneesh 

Shri Mataji: Put your right-hand on your stomach. Down. You just say: ‘Mother I am my own master’. Again, again, again, again, again, again. Better now? Great. Now that Rajneesh, useless fellow. Done. You are alright now. Feeling better? Now, you come and see them. Just a color has come on your face. Horrible fellow, uncelar(he is trying to fight after ages), do you know I live in pune myself. Useless. You have to unclear() all his photographs. Are you wearing the mala? Come and see them alright? They will make you the master. He was Ravana in last life. Rasamukhi. Alright you come and see them. Tension is over. Your tension is at least less. 

Do you feel the cool breeze? Is he catholic? Put your right-hand on your heart, unclear(), come forward. Again, again ,again alright, are you getting in the left-hand, now you just say You are. You get it now. That’s the answer, right, recognized. Now you come and see them. They will make you the masters. 

Hello, Siddhi, haa, who gave you this? Mommy gave you? Very sweet, it looks very very sweet aren’t they? Very sweet. You like them? You must also wear a saree sometime. Alright? 

So madam, how are you? How did you feel?

Yogi: She felt it Shri Mataji.

Shri Mataji: Vishuddhi, has she, met guru or someone?

Yogi: Rajneesh, Shri Mataji 

Shri Mataji: Hare Rama, alright, put your right-hand on your stomach. Put this one towards me. Now say: ‘Mother, I am my own master’, ha, cooler? Now forget that horrible fellow. Come and see them, they will tell you what is to be done. Aright? May God bless you. Must get rid off these problems, otherwise it will feel very funny in the head. Alright? May God bless you. At the right time.

So you felt the cool breeze? You have not been to guru or anyone? She was in India? 

Lady: unlcear(Ohm Shanthi)

Shri Mataji: That’s another one, now put your right hand on your stomach. Now just say: ‘Mother, I am my own master’ forget all of them. It’s alright, working on, better? Now say: ‘I had my own master’ say it ten times. Yes, with full heart and confidence, you are your own master. Say it, say it just now see how the truth will show you, say it, say it, say it, what’s the harm in saying? Again say it, please say, who is stopping you from saying? Just say it. Come along. Say it, otherwise you won’t get it. That’s the problem you have there. Can you feel it something throbbing? Yes that’s it. You better do it. Well, say it now, come along. Again, again, again ten times horrible there, that chakra is completely caught up. Again say, again, better? Is it coming now? 

Yogi: It’s warm

Shri Mataji: Just say, ‘Mother, give me the pure knowledge’ very hot, yes say it again. Very hot. Again say it: ‘Mother, please give me pure knowledge’, again better? Again say it, Mother., from your heart. Shri Mataji, from your heart, say it from your heart. From your heart. You are asking for something great, aren’t you? That’s what they do in Pondicherry, they develop your brains not your heart isn’t it? Come along. You have to say, Mother please, Mother please give me pure knowledge. Alright, put your hand on your heart and just say it: ‘Mother, please come in my heart’. Again, Mother please, again, better. It can’t be like that-closed. Let’s see, Mother please come in my heart. Pondicherry people very difficult. You are catching very much on the left side and the left side is not clean. So we have to clean it. So that’s why we are asking to help us now alright by saying certain things to clear out your chakras. They are not clean. So we are asking you where did you catch the problem. Kolenang where did you go? You are a hippie or what? You are a hippie? No? You stayed in the Coolum beach? In the hotel? You feel guilty? You feel guilty. Don’t feel guilty. Just say: ‘Mother I am not guilty’. Guilty. Again, again, now are you feeling any cool breeze? So problem was, you are feeling guilty? And feeling very hot. I know I am feeling very hot unclear(). Now don’t feel guilty. Guilty, what do you feel guilty about? If you feel guilty, and not to feel guilty at all, promise me. What do you feel guilty about? Something like that, everything forgiven. Alright? Everything forgiven, now you are not going to feel guilty. Alright? Come and see them. Just on the guilty she was paining all that, just on the guilt.

Yes, are you alright? 

Guest Yogi: Not today now.

Shri Mataji: What happened? You felt before?

Guest yogi: Three years, I started a meditation of sahaja yoga, 

Another Yogi: He got his realization from Sandra three years ago

Guest Yogi: Half a year after when I meditate, I felt a bowl of before me a bowl of I don’t know it was some energy I didn’t know how to handle it.

Shri Mataji: You have been to some guru or someone before? 

Guest Yogi: No no

Shri Mataji: No? Please try to remember

Guest Yogi: Three years before a little bit of Kriya Yoga. 

Shri Mataji: Sahaj yoga is ‘Akria’, it is ‘Akriya’ means no Kriya. Alright, put your right hand on your stomach. Put left-hand towards me. Now go on saying: ‘Mother, I am my own master’. Again, again, again. Don’t feel guilty, what are feeling to guilty about? What are you guilty about? Why do you feel guilty? Now don’t feel guilty. I am not guilty at all. At all, again, again, feeling now? Now no more feeling guilty. Forget it. Forget it. See it’s true. German style, you feel guilty for nothing at all. German style. No more feeling guilty, no more feeling guilty. No more feeling guilty. Alright? You are perfectly alright. You are a Sahaja yogi why should you be guilty about what? Now don’t unclear() anything at all. I am not guilty at all, I am not guilty at all, I am not guilty at all. Alright? May God bless you. 

Come along. 

Yogi: She is from Frankfurt.

Shri Mataji: So madam, how are you?

Another Yogi: Sahaja yogi, one month ago Shri Mataji

Shri Mataji: She is alright. 

Lady: I felt the cooler breeze but not unclear()

Shri Mataji: Not today? Are you doubting me? 

Lady: I don’t know what to say.

Yogi: She is thinking too much normally now she doesn’t know what to think, it’s a good sign. 

Shri Mataji: Better now.

Lady: I feel cooler in hands

Shri Mataji: Just say: ‘Mother, come in my head. Because I am in your Sahasrara you see?’ again, yes, again, once more done. At your disposal. It’s got there; it is got there. It is there, yes yes. You asked for it and I have to. May God bless you.

Lady: Ya, Thank you. 

Shri Mataji: So that’s good.

… come along, felt the cool breeze, ya he did, he is very good. It’s good. What do you feel guilty about? German? 

Yogi: He is furious Shri Mataji 

Shri Mataji: About what

Guest Yogi: I can’t find proper way about myself. 

Yogi: You got it now.

Shri Mataji: Now you found it. Alright now you master it. And don’t feel guilty. Now go and master it. You have to master it. You are the seeker alright? You are a seeker. Now you have to understand your own reality. Go to them and find out but not to feel guilty that is first condition, otherwise you will not find reality. Because that’s not truth. Alright? You must see your capabilities. Be more on the positive side. Count your blessings. Get your realization fully fixed. Alright? May God bless you. Now not to feel guilty is the promise. By next year you will be a great master. 

Are you alright now or still feeling guilty? Put your right-hand here, put your left-hand.

Now,

Another Yogi: He got his realization about two weeks ago Shri Mataji, we had a small program, and there he got his realization. 

Shri Mataji: So how is he?

Another Yogi: His hands are hot. He too Anastasia Shri Mataji

Shri Mataji: Put your left-hand on your liver. Now, I forgive everyone. again, again, again, ah good, feeling the cool breeze? Alright, put your left-hand towards me. Put your right hand on your stomach say: ‘Mother, please give me the pure knowledge’. Again, ‘Shri Mataji, please give me the true knowledge’. Again. 

Another Yogi: With this wrong experience, he had the experience that someone turned his head completely and now unclear()

Shri Mataji: This was when? 

Yogi: One year ago.

Shri Mataji: Alright, put the sugar and will get some vibrated sugar, take that and neutralize it. Better? Lot of sugar you eat. That will neutralize it. Take from them vibrated water and sugar, it will neutralize at least he will go to the right side to supra conscious. You will be absolutely different person. Take your photograph now and later on. Take it, take all that, take all that.

Put it on the other side.

Another Yogi: Shri Mataji, this is the generous owner of beautiful flat unclear(). 

Shri Mataji: So did you feel the cool breeze?

Guest Yogi: No never.

Shri Mataji: Never? I see. Is he German? 

Another Yogi: He is Italian from Milan. He lived a quite a long time in Germany.

Shri Mataji: But Italians are very good at it. They get it very fast. 

Another Yogi: Yes, maybe he assume little bit too much of the Germans style of life. Workaholic.

Shri Mataji: You are feeling cool breeze now. Is it here in the hand? Forgive everyone. Just forgive, say it from your heart. See the very unclear()

Another Yogi: He says, he cannot forgive. 

Shri Mataji: If you forgive or don’t forgive, you don’t do anything. Will you do anything? But if you don’t forgive, you play into wrong hands. So now you forgive. Forgive everyone. Forgive everyone. Forgive. Forgive everyone. Forgive, forgive everyone. Now, come forward. Forgive, don’t carry the load. Just forgive. Forgive, forgive, forgive, forgive, forgive, forgive, forgive, ah, now better, see. Done. May God bless you. 

Italians very fond of Mothers. That’s their character. 

Yes madam, got it? Already thin what’s the matter? Unclear () already thin, we should give them some sugar I think they have some liver problem. 

Another Yogi: Yes Shri Mataji, will give. 

Shri Mataji: Alright.

Yogi: She will stay in Munich Shri Mataji.

Shri Mataji: Acha (I see), Alright. May God bless you. May God bless you. 

Still more flowers, flowers and flowers.

Are you alright? He wanted to come to USA but this is the problem unclear(), because I don’t know if they have planes or not I am going to unclear() you see going with me would be unclear() but if you could, if you could I will be happy. 

Yogini: Shri Mataji, would you come to San Diego for the puja?

Shri Mataji: San Diego, you see let them tell you. Because or I feel that if they have all the people who are staying there because anybody who is going to put just five dollars, if they put down, I will be very happy. 

Yogini: unclear()

Shri Mataji: Alright, Christine is coming for guru puja. Its better Christine, Christine is better. Check with her alright? Because I don’t know so small ashram there. I don’t know what arrangements there. Like these people wanted to come here and I didn’t know I said, ‘it’s just a small ashram, where are they going to stay?’ but they had arranged everything. If you could just find out first then it’s alright. 

Yogini: Thank you Shri Mataji.

Yogi: Thank you Shri Mataji. 

Leave a Reply
Logged in as Prashant handge. Edit your profile. Log out? Required fields are marked *

Comment *


Copyright © 2026 Nirmala Vidya Amruta. All Rights Reserved. Privacy | Terms of Use | Amruta is supported by the WordPress Multilingual Plugin. | oska.dev
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
About WordPress
Nirmala Vidya Amruta
Hi, Prashant handge
Search