SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 1988-05-19
TALK: You have to respect your Self-realization
LOCATION/EVENT: casal-del-metge-barcelona-spain
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:20:50
CHARS: 27760
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
Post navigation
Previous post:
On your vibrations you can understand what’s wrong with you
Next post:
You have to respect your Self-realization
It is the knowledge of your roots
Casal del Metge, Barcelona (Spain)  View Map
Thursday, May 19th, 1988 
Leave a comment
Public Program
Transcript (English) – Draft
English
Spanish
Audio
Video DP-RAW
Barcelona, Casal del Metge, Spain
93'
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English

1988-05-19 It Is The Knowledge Of Your Roots, Barcelona Spain DP-RAW, 93′
Show Video Details 
This page is also available on the Learn Sahaja Yoga website. We encourage you to share it widely to spread Sahaja Yoga knowledge! 
IMPORTANT NOTICE: This text has NOT been verified. Would you like to help us verify? For more info, please click here. Please note that the text may be incomplete and contain errors, so caution is advised; we recommend cross-checking it with the original audio/video material. 


19 May 1988
Public Program
Casal del Metge, Barcelona (Spain)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
….. We have to understand what is the truth and what is love. The truth is what we know through our central nervous system. Like I can feel this is cold, I can see this is white through my central nervous system. It is not a mental projection or some sort of imagination, or some emotional manifestation. Truth is what it is. But surprisingly the truth is love. 

Now when we are just at the crossroad of our new development in this country we have to see that we do not commit the same mistakes as all others have done who have progressed much faster than us. They have progressed faster with all their mental theology or you can call it theories about how to grow and they have over-development. They have developed themselves to such an extent that now they are standing at the precipice of a very big shock. Because the knowledge they have about anything of their road is the knowledge of the tree outside. But they do not have the knowledge of the roots. And any tree that grows too fast and does not know about its roots will definitely come to its destruction. So it is very important that we should try to find out our roots..

This one, as they have explained to you, is the knowledge of your roots. In here they described you as the kundalini, in the triangular bone of sacrum, it’s your pure desire power. Whatever I am going to tell you now you have to treat it as a hypothesis. And if you are scientific about it then you must keep your mind open to see if whatever I’m saying is the truth or not. So if you can open your mind to this knowledge of your roots you will be surprised to know that you have been made very delicately, beautifully within yourself. All this machinery within you is existing, in all of you, as if you are all like a divine computer built-in. Now this computer has to be only connected to the mains. And when it is connected to the mains then it starts working. And that has to happen to all of us so we know the purpose of our life. 

As we see today we have such diseases that we cannot explain. We have such problems that we cannot overcome. Everyone seems to be under stress and the fear of destruction is very obviously seen on the faces of people. Those also who talk of peace have no peace within themselves. 

But there is a big possibility that all of us can become the Spirit, the Self-realized saints. For this you do not have to leave your family, your houses, your jobs, anything. For this you cannot pay. For this you do not have to put any effort. Because it is a living process of evolution. As you have become human being without doing anything, in the same way you can become super-human being without doing anything. It is not an artificiality; it cannot be any drama; it’s a genuine thing that works out within you because the time has come. I call it the “blossom time”. Like a small seed sprouts by itself, spontaneously it becomes a tree and all the flowers appear on the tree and then with the gentle breeze will get transformed in fruits. 

So the time has come for all of you to become fruitful people. All this confusion around should give a greater feeling of this pure desire. The desire is to become one, united with the All-pervading power. It is described in all the great books that there is an All-pervading power of God’s love. But we have never felt it. They say it works but we have never seen it. So we have to become subtler beings to feel it. 

I say it is the pure desire because all other desires are impure. All other desires lead to another desire. It’s an economic law that in general desires cannot be satiated, that we jump from one desire to another desire. But this is the pure desire that you become a part and parcel of the Divine, that you manifest your own powers of divinity. This is all your own. I do not have to do anything. You have to get it spontaneously. 

If you get this happening in your being you can become the Spirit. And the Spirit is the one which manifests absolute truth. That is how you can know what is the truth. When this pure desire power – kundalini, rises through your spine, through your brain and comes out of your fontanel bone area you feel the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost. Then you get the actualization of your baptism in reality. 

And a complete transformation starts taking place within you. First [UNCLEAR] you get: all your diseases are cured, on mental level all your worries are dropped. You become your own master and nothing can tempt you and dominate you. You achieve your spiritual ascent in a way that you know everything about spirituality.

Firstly you know on your fingertips if a person is truly spiritual or not and then you know that you have become a personality which is collectively conscious. Means on your central nervous system, on your fingertips, you can feel your own centers and the centers of others. 

All this must be looking like a very fantastic story to you. I’ve been working like this for the last 18 years but unfortunately it’s the first time I have come to Barcelona. And so many, I’m telling you, in 15 countries people are getting transformed. 

Tomorrow I’ll be able to explain to you in more details as to what happens to you when you get your Self-realization. But it is not the explanation that is important. It is the happening and then the becoming which is important. Like in these room there are lights and if you have to put off you can just switch off. But in case I try to explain to you everything about electricity, the history of electricity, all about it then you get bored of it and you won’t have the light. So the best thing is to get the experience and the light and then see for yourself. All of you have this possibility. 

So I’d request you now if you have any questions to ask me but not too many questions because also questions will not give you Realization. Because it is not a mental activity, it has to work out. And one cannot guarantee it. If it works out – well and good. Even if it does not work out it will work out after second or third meeting. 

The other day in Madrid, on the first day people did not get so many Realization but on the second day everybody got it. But this is not for frivolous people but for people who are sincere and honest and who care for their ascent.

So please ask me questions if you have any.

Question: [A lady talks about a meditation she is doing.]

Shri Mataji: Such a long question. Ask a short one. What is the experience she feels? Can she feel the All-pervading power? A cool breeze around. 

Question: Can everybody get it if we have sincere desire?

Shri Mataji: Of course, but if they have sincere desire. This is a big hurdle because we have our conditionings very deeply in us, also we ego in us.

Question: Is Sahaja Yoga related to another kind of mediation with sound and light?

Shri Mataji: No, it is not a meditation with any sound or light because sound and light are matter. 

Question: [UNCLEAR, medical problem from an accident]

Shri Mataji: Yes, curable. But then you have to cure others. I’ll cure you and also you’ll become a saint and then you have to cure others. Because Divine has common sense: it wants to cure those people who would give back. We do not repair the lamp which will not give us light, do we? 

Question: Is it convenient to be a vegetarian for this meditation?

Shri Mataji: Meditation has nothing to do with food. We have to know that food is for the body and whatever suits our body we have to eat.

Question: What is God for you?

Shri Mataji: It will take another lecture, madam and I’ll explain to you. And it will take us at least five or six days of mine to have to express God. But you should not be frightened with the word God. He exists. Now the time has come to prove his existence. And you can feel his existence. It’s better to explain once you have felt him. Alright?

Question: [UNCLEAR]

Shri Mataji: To sprout is very easy. It is like a seed is sprouted, it’s very easy but you have to put it in the Mother Earth. 

Question: [UNCLEAR, jewel mediation]

Shri Mataji: Actually “ju” means the people who have known but they are not, they are not. They are not the ones who are realizes souls. We have many jewels in Sahaja Yoga alright.

Question: Do you believe in the existence of evil?

Shri Mataji: Of course. There is evil. Those who tell you there is no evil must be evil themselves. 

Question: Is blood cancer curable?

Shri Mataji: It’s curable. You must be a very futuristic personality, that’s why. But it can be brought to a balance. 

Question: When you are depressed you get more access.

Shri Mataji: Which way, in spirituality or material? 

Question: It’s about a psychological question.

Shri Mataji: Yes, psychological, that’s correct. A psychological [UNCLEAR] more but we are now dealing here with parasympathetic nervous system and we actually use your parasympathetic nervous system to give you a balance. That is why. If you are a doctor I’m very happy to tell you that in India there are doctors who are doing MDs with a research on Sahaja Yoga and two have got their MDs now. And there are seven doctors in London who are working out in Sahaja Yoga. And you should actually get the paper on which I talk to the medical [conference] in India about what Sahaja Yoga is; how it is with your parasympathetic so you can go through it and see for yourself. 

Question: Do you believe in re-incarnation?

Shri Mataji: Who’s asked the question? I would like to see him. Of course. Whatever I believe has no meaning. Supposing I tell you, “Believe me.” Why should you believe in me? Unless and until you find out yourself whatever I’m saying is true. You will yourself know the truth. You should not take me for granted. Of course, you must have your open mind but that doesn’t mean you should take me for granted. There is no blind faith which is going to help you. 

Question: What do we have to do to get Realization?

Shri Mataji: Ah, that’s a good question. That’s what we are going to do just now.

Question: What is the red point on your forehead?

Shri Mataji: It’s the sign of a married lady in India. 

Question: I felt some cool breeze from there.

Shri Mataji: Really? Very good. That’s the sign of Christ. Tomorrow I’ll tell you where is that Christ resides within us.

Question: [UNCLEAR]

Shri Mataji: Who is the gentleman asking the question?

Sit down, madam. You want to have your Realization, madam? Now sit down, don’t disturb.

Question: I feel the Spirit in my heart.

Shri Mataji: Yes, correct. But you have not brought it with your attention. When it comes with your attention it will act.

Question: [UNCLEAR]

Shri Mataji: No, you can’t. If you try to do it you’ll lose your cool vibrations. You want to enjoy more so you don’t want to do it.

Question: What’s the difference between Sahaja Yoga and Kundalini Yoga?

Shri Mataji: Actually “yoga” means, is the “union with the Divine”, not physical standing on your head, it’s not the one. That in the past people used to do about 8 – 9 000 years back in India. Now that Kundalini yoga is the same as mine but many people are using this word without raising the kundalini. But as far as Sahaja Yoga, “saha” means “with”, “ja” means “born”, it is spontaneous yoga. So all yogas, whatever they talk to you, were for you to get your Self-realization. Even the Vedas, the word “veda” comes from “getting the knowledge on your central nervous system”. 

Also Saint Thomas when he went to India, he wrote a scripture a big jar, he put it in Egypt. And there he described the people who will have the knowledge as Gnostics. And “gn” in Sanskrit means “to know”. From there, from the Sanskrit only, the world has come what you call as “knowledge”, for the “gn” only. 

In every gospel, in every scripture it is described that you have to become a person who is twice born. In Indian scriptures it is described as the one who knows the Brahma, this All-pervading power, called as “Dvijaha” – means “twice born”. And also a bird is called “dvijaha” because first it’s an egg, enclosed egg, and then it becomes a bird, also called dvijaha. So even in Koran Mohammed Sahib has said that at the time of Resurrection, he calls it Qiyama, your hands will speak and you will know the truth through your hands and your hands will give witness against you. Of course, Christ has said that you are to be born again. But if you falsely put a certificate that you are born again there is no meaning. If you are born again then you must have the powers of a saint. It’s a happening and a becoming like I said. 

Question: What do you think about the supernatural powers?

Shri Mataji: I will explain you about that tomorrow about these powers of the dead which are not good for us. There are very injurious. 

Question: What is the red dot on your forehead?

Shri Mataji: It’s the sign of a married lady in India.

Question: At what level of spirituality are you?

Shri Mataji: I am not going to tell you, you better find out. Because Christ has said that, “I am the Son of God and the Light and the Path.” and they crucified him. I’m very clever, I’m not going to tell it. I want to live, I want to work and I want to give Realization to people.

[applause]

Question: Do you have any fear?

Shri Mataji: Fear about me? No, no, I don’t have any fear but people are so stupid.

Question: [UNCLEAR] 

Shri Mataji: You will understand very soon. It’s a sick world, it’s a sick world.

Question: How do you recognize a realized person?

Shri Mataji: You will first feel the cool breeze on your fingertips and you’ll feel the cool breeze coming out of your own head and you’ll have to certify yourself. Then you’ll have to see by working it out on others and on yourself how you have become empowered. Like if you give me pesetas I don’t know what the pesetas are. I have to spend them in the market to see their value. 

Question: [UNCLEAR]

Shri Mataji: No, I don’t say anything like that, Doctor. Because if I say that half of you will go out. But you become your own master. You see, supposing you are holding a snake in your hand and I say, “You have a snake in your hand” and there is darkness. You will say, “Alright. I’m having it.” Because if you say to human beings, “Don’t do something.” they’ll definitely do it. So best is to put on the light, let them see the snake in their hand, they’ll just drop it away. It all automatically works out. I don’t have to tell you anything. You become responsible for yourself.

[A lady thanks to Shri Mataji.]

Shri Mataji: May God bless you. Thank you.

Question: Can you do miracles?

Shri Mataji: He’s asking all these questions, what’s the use? You better do yourself the miracles, you yourself will do miracles. But not this type like you get some diamond, something like that, no. 

One thing you must understand: that this is only the first meeting and I am here the first time. And such an ocean of knowledge. How much can you know in one lecture? So have patience. Get your Realization then gradually you will know each and everything. 

Question: [UNCLEAR]

Shri Mataji: Are you a journalist? You have missed your profession. 

Alright. Those now who want to have their Realization should sit here because I cannot force it on anyone. Those who do not want can go; they should not disturb others. Those who want it, it will hardly take ten minutes for you to get your Realization. If you get it. Those who do not want can go, I cannot force it on you.

Now let’s get started. You don’t have to do much except that I will tell you how to open your different centers just by taking your hand on these centers which I will tell you before. 

It’s very simple, anybody can do, at any age, it is not restricted to anyone. Only thing I have to tell you that we have to take help from all the elements. So please, first of all, to take help of the Mother Earth we should take out your shoes if you can.

Very nice people. You are very nice people, I must tell you. I would have come to Barcelona before, much before.

So first of all you have to sit with a very pleasant mood towards yourself: means in a very relaxed mood and you should not feel guilty at all. Because the Divine is the ocean of forgiveness and we cannot commit any mistake that cannot be dissolved in his love. Only the human beings can make mistakes. So please do not have any grudge against yourself and do not count your mistakes. 

You have to put left hand towards me because it’s symbolically represents the power of desire.

This I will tell you tomorrow about the left and the right hand. Now the left hand is towards me and the right hand we use for relaxing our centers. So, at first we put your hand on our heart where resides the Spirit. Put it on your heart. Then we put our right hand on the left hand side of the upper part of the abdomen and press it. This is the center of our mastery by which we become masters. Now again on the left hand side we put our hand in the lower part of the abdomen and press it with our fingers. This is the center through which the Divine laws work. We are only working on the left hand side. Then you raise your hand again on the center of master which is in the upper part of your abdomen on the left hand side and press it. Then you raise your hand again onto your heart. Now you raise your right hand on the corner of your shoulder and turn your head on the right hand side. Please remember that hand should be put this way, not from the backside. Turn to your right. This is the center which catches when you feel guilty and is responsible for giving you spondylitis or angina. Please hold your hand straight and put it on the forehead and press it on both the sides. This is the center of forgiveness. You have to place the same hand on the back side, the left hand towards me, and push your head back slowly to rest on your hand. Stretch your hand like this pushing back your fingers and put the center of your palm on the fontanel bone area which was a soft bone in your childhood, like this and bend your hand. Press the scalp and move it seven times clockwise. That’s all you have to do.

Now remember the right hand, not the left. 

So now you put your left hand like this, both the feet apart and the right hand on your heart. Then at this time I tell you that you close your eyes and you should not open your eyes till I tell you because the attention has to go inside. Now you have to ask me a very fundamental question because the Spirit resides in your heart. You have to ask three times – you can call me “Shri Mataji” or “Mother”, whatever you like, “Mother, am I the Spirit?” Ask this three times within you. In your heart, inside. 

If you become the Spirit you also become your own master. So the second question you have to ask by putting your hand in the upper part of your abdomen on the left hand side and press it. Now please the question, “Mother, am I my own master?” Please ask this question three times. Please ask the question, “Mother, am I my own master?” 

Now take down your hand in the lower part of your abdomen and press it, on the left hand side. This is the center of pure knowledge of Divine laws. Now I cannot force on you, you have to ask for it. So please ask, “Mother, may I have the pure knowledge.” Please ask six times because this center has got six petals. As you ask the question the kundalini will start rising upwards. 

Now you put your right hand again on the left hand side of your stomach, in the upper part. To open this center you have to say with full confidence in yourself, “Mother, I am my own master.” Say it ten times. Have full confidence. 

Now raise your hand and put it on the heart again. Now here you say with full confidence twelve times, “Mother, I am the Spirit.” 

Now one has to know that the Divine is the ocean of love and bliss. It is the ocean of grace but above all it is the ocean of forgiveness. So, as I told you before, all our mistakes can be dissolved into this ocean of love. So please forgive yourself. And know that you are the temple of God.

So put your right hand on the corner between your shoulder and your neck and turn your head to the right, and say sixteen times with all confidence, “Mother, I am not guilty at all.” As I told you, you have to be very pleasantly placed towards yourself. I would say now even if you still feel guilty it’s better to take the punishment of saying 108 times, “Mother, I am not guilty.”

Now put this hand on your forehead across on both the sides and press it. And say from your heart, not how many times, “Mother, I forgive everyone.” You can bend your head. And know that when you forgive or you do not forgive you do not do anything. Only thing is that if you do not forgive then you play into your hands. Bend your head.

Now raise your right hand on the back of your head and put the load of the head on the hand and look upwards. Don’t open the eyes. And here for your own satisfaction you have to say, “Oh, Divine, if I’ve done any mistakes, please forgive me.” Don’t count your mistakes, don’t think of them because you have to enter into the Kingdom of God.

Now please stretch your hand, right hand, and put the center of your palm on top of the fontanel bone area and press it hard, and move it seven times; and stretch your fingers. Here again, I cannot cross your freedom so you have to say, “Mother, I want my Self-realization. Please give me my Self-realization.” Stretch your fingers outward. [Shri Mataji blows into the microphone.]

Please take down your hand and slowly open your eyes. Now place your left hand towards me like this. Now see on your head if you feel the cool breeze, with the right hand. You can bend your head. Some people get it very high. Don’t doubt yourself.

Now place your right hand towards me and feel with the left hand and see if there is a cool breeze coming out of your head. 

Now again place your left hand towards me and see for yourself if there is a cool breeze coming out of your head again. 

Keep your eyes open now and put your hands up like this and the head upwards and just ask one question, “Mother, is this the Cool Breeze of the Holy Ghost?” three times. 

Now put them down. Now see in your hands. The Cool Breeze. 

Now those who have felt the cool breeze in their hands or from your head, please raise your hands, both the hands. Good. I’m happy you got it. Doctor, I see you. It’s alright, not to worry. It will work out, don’t worry.

All of you have got it, most of you. Those who haven’t got also can come on the stage. And Doctor, can you come? I would like to see you, you’ve too much intellect. And you feel very relaxed. Now see, you are not thinking. 

[Shri Matai invites people on the stage and start working on them first as a group and then individually].

Did you forgive everyone? First of all, all of you should forgive everyone with your right hand like this and the left hand like this [in the air]. First of all, forgive everyone. Do you feel better? See now, you didn’t forgive. Forgive from your heart. Please forgive, it will come. Yes? Good.

You forgive all the patients who trouble you. [working on a doctor] Sure? You have so much heat. Nervous? Now you won’t be anymore. See now. Alright? Alright now, doctor? Now better but there is too much heat. Now better, doctor? You must sit like this for a while because the heat must get out. The heat from the body has to go out.

[A person feels cold and hot, cold and hot.] You’ve been to some guru? Ah, that’s why. Who was the guru? [UNCLEAR] Horrible. That’s why. Come here. That’s why you are feeling hot. Now put your right hand on the stomach. Now you just say that, “Mother, I am my own master.” from your heart. Say it ten times. Keep your eyes open. Because you are seeker you are getting the cool breeze but the guru is hot. Need not having gurus. Wrong type, very wrong. Anybody who takes money don’t believe him. [UNCLEAR, about the false guru.] Better? Yes, yes. You have to establish it. You have to sit down there with your left hand towards Me and right hand on Mother Earth, to let the heat come out. 

Where is that gentleman who had accident and got hurt?

You didn’t feel anything, madam? You forgave everyone? Sure? You keep good health? Let her say, “Mother, please come in my head.” Hold your breath, leave. Again, leave. Again, leave it. [Shri Mataji asks the Sahaja Yogis to continue working on the lady.]

Are you alright, madam? What happened to you? What is this? Is arthritis? It’s psychosomatic. It’ll be alright. Something happened. Better now? This one also? She could sit for a while. You see the hands are opening out. Did you go to any …? [UNCLEAR] That’s why. That’s why you got it. [Shri Mataji asks Sahaja Yogis to work on the lady with a candle.] He will tell you what is to be done. This is due to the fact that you’ve been to …

Who gave you this? Not guru, that’s not guru. [Shri Mataji continues working on a lady from before after she has taken out a necklace given by someone]. That’s why you are not so good. You don’t come with this tomorrow. Let see if you get it. You want to get Realization, madam? Forget about this one; put it in the water. Not good.

Both the hands? You’ve been to some guru? Ask a question, “Mother, is there God?” Now see.

Leave a Reply
Logged in as Prashant handge. Edit your profile. Log out? Required fields are marked *

Comment *


Copyright © 2026 Nirmala Vidya Amruta. All Rights Reserved. Privacy | Terms of Use | Amruta is supported by the WordPress Multilingual Plugin. | oska.dev
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
About WordPress
Nirmala Vidya Amruta
Hi, Prashant handge
Search