SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 1990-08-01
TALK: Nirmala Vidya Amruta
LOCATION/EVENT: unknown-location
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:23:06
CHARS: 163667
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English

Türkçe
Post navigation
Previous post:
The Face of God. A Most Soul Stirring Biography of a Living God by Yogi Mahajan
Next post:
Islam Enlightened by Javed Khan
Know Thyself by Calin Costian
Books online | All Books
Saturday, May 25th, 2024
Calin Costian
Introductions
Online, Paperback, PDF
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English
Türkçe
Google Drive
Lulu – Paper Edition
To all the Seekers of Truth

Table of Contents
Acknowledgments
Foreword
Chapter 1. The Quest
Chapter 2. The Beginning
Chapter 3. The Mechanism
Chapter 4. Mooladhara
Chapter 5. Swadhishthan
Chapter 6. Nabhi
Chapter 7. Void
Chapter 8. Heart
Chapter 9. Vishuddhi
Chapter 10. Agnya
Chapter 11. Sahasrara
Chapter 12. The Three Channels of Energy
Chapter 13. Miracles of the Divine Power
Chapter 14. Testimonials of Enlightenment
Chapter 15. Epilogue
Appendix A. The Experience of Self Realization
Appendix B. On Meditation
Appendix C. Correspondences
Glossary of Terms
Acknowledgments
I would like to first and foremost offer my humble gratitude and deepest respect to Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, the founder of Sahaja Yoga Meditation, who is the source of all knowledge and experiences shared in this book, for her loving guidance, not only concerning the writing of this book, but in all aspects of my life. No words can describe my eternal gratitude.

I would like to give my heartfelt thanks to Ann Capozzoli and Mark Taylor for their tireless work in reviewing and helping with the editing of this book; to Denis Morentsov for the graphic design and layout; to Anastasia Piskunova for the inspiring illustrations; to my Publisher for taking on this project; and to Alan Wherry, Steve Wollenberger, Dave Dunphy and Carolyn Vance for their support, guidance and cherished friendship over the treasured decades we have spent together. My gratitude goes to the late Prof. Dr. U. C. Rai, Dr. Ramesh Manocha, Prof. Dr. Katya Rubia, Dr. Simon Golosheikin and Dr. Wolfgang Hackl for their research on the physical, mental and emotional benefits of Sahaja Yoga Meditation. I would like to thank all Sahaja Yogis who have offered their contributions and testimonies for this book, and to all who have been my precious companions on the continuous journey of spirituality.

Finally, I would like to thank my family for reviewing the book and supporting my efforts throughout. My father, Dan Costian, through the eminent example of his scholarship and tireless work as a writer over decades, has helped me follow in his footsteps as a writer. My mother, Antoaneta Costian, brought me into this world and nurtured me throughout my childhood and adult life with her unbounded love, encouraging me to write from an early age. My son James and my daughter Isabel are the best children a parent can hope for. And last but not least my wife, Barbara, who made me the luckiest man in the world by being my wife, who has steadily encouraged all my artistic endeavors, and who has always been my unshakable support, muse, and soulmate.

Foreword
Gnothi Seauton – Know Thyself – was inscribed on the facade of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, and has been attributed by many to the Greek sage and philosopher Socrates.

These words beg the fundamental question: Who am I? Who is this higher Self that needs to be known? And how is that knowledge to be acquired? 

Consciously or unconsciously, every human being seeks the answer to this question. The quest for self-knowledge has been paralleled with the search for the Divine or the search for the lost paradise – the paradise not as a place but rather as a state – a steady state of joy, peace, health, balance, and harmony with ourselves and with the world. In each of us there is an innate desire to become better human beings, and to attain a higher state of consciousness.

Throughout history, many sages and spiritual personalities have come at different times and geographical places to guide humanity and shed light on this dilemma of the human existence. These highly evolved souls were often misunderstood by the people in charge of interpreting and creating movements after the image of their teachings, decades or centuries after their advent on the earth. 

All great spiritual paths, Yoga systems, Zen and other ancient traditions talked about attaining the knowledge of the Self, not by reading scriptures or through mental analysis, but by attaining a higher state of awareness. However, without a direct experience of this state, we have not been adequately equipped to comprehend it. Philosophers and writers used their logic and imagination in an attempt to approximate it in innumerable systems of thought that failed to provide a real answer. Those few souls who attained such elevated states tried to describe the indescribable as best they could, often using poetry and parables, but they could not impart their experience to others. The question remained – what about the rest of us? Is there a way for humanity to achieve this higher state at a mass level?

This book, though yet another act of writing, attempts to shed some light on this profound question, as well as show a way by which an initial experience of this state can be concretely felt, marking the initial step of a journey that you, dear reader, can embark on. 

The knowledge presented in this book is ancient, though it was kept secret for millennia, transmitted from guru (spiritual master) to disciple. Recently, it was revealed and placed in a new light by Dr. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, founder of Sahaja Yoga Meditation, Nobel Peace Prize nominee, and acclaimed by many as one of today’s most significant voices on spirituality, peace and global integration. Hundreds of thousands in over one hundred countries have felt the remarkable benefits of this system of meditation, a practice that goes a long way towards bridging the gap between science and spirituality. The author of this book is one such person among these hundreds of thousands, who was able to gain insight into the physical, mental, emotional and spiritual aspects of the human being based on his practice of this meditation method over more than two decades.

The times we live in show all the signs of being special. The exponential nature of our evolutionary curve seems to indicate that today we may be on the brink of an inner revolution, a transformation that will take our awareness to a dramatically new level, forever altering the future course of our lives.

The complete answer to this matter can only be a journey to the essence of what we are. It is something that only our own direct experience will show.

Chapter 1. The Quest
“You cannot know the meaning of your life until you are connected to the power that created you.”

— Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi

The search for the subtle truth is as old as human civilization. It is hard to say whether this search begins with the seeker who, fed up with going around in the circles of mundane duality (pleasure and pain, happiness and unhappiness), begins to thirst after the truth; or whether it is a higher power that beckons the seeker. The rules of the cosmic game have been set since the beginning of creation: the human being, the most highly evolved creature on the planet, has been given a precious gift called free will. 

There are events in our lives that are out of our control, managed by an all-pervading power that does everything in the universe. We need not worry about those since no one could orchestrate them better anyway – they are all arranged in our path for us to learn from them and turn us towards the truth to which we aspire. Then there are events that depend entirely on us, on our free will – and this is where each individual must choose their own path, making everyday decisions that ultimately shape our lives. 

The first category of events which are beyond our control guide us and ensure that each of us gets a full chance to reach the destination of our journey. The events of the second type are those we must figure out ourselves, first by knowing what the right choices are, and secondly by having the sincerity and courage to make those choices and ignore the wrong ones. 

Seeking takes many forms and there are many questions we ask ourselves in trying to find the truth. I remember as a young child thinking that one thing that appeared fishy to me somehow was the fact that we all appeared to be separate individuals. This cannot be, I told myself, we must be one and the same being. Why I could not feel pain when someone else cut their finger was beyond my understanding. However, I had a strong feeling that someday I would encounter something or someone that would answer these questions. My instinct told me this was going to happen in my thirties. As it happened, after many years of seeking, I was fortunate to discover at the age of twenty-two a meditation practice that changed my life.

What makes life possible? What is the power or agent that makes our heart beat and our breathing and digestion take place without our intervention? The doctors will say it is the autonomous nervous system. But who is this auto? In every automobile there has to be a driver. Science has its own limitations, and this is one of the questions it is unable to answer conclusively.

We return to the fundamental question man asked himself since the beginning of civilization: who am I? 

Through analysis we can also see what the Self is not: we are not the body, which is rather the physical vessel of the Self but not the Self itself; we are not our thoughts, for we can stop our thoughts, even if for a brief moment, and still continue to exist; similarly we are not the emotions, and so on. Perhaps if we continue removing that which we are not, we will be left with what we truly are – something pure and eternal called the Self or Spirit, which many spiritual paths affirm is of a divine nature.

The Self is the one who provides the life force, the “driver” in our automobile. This is the greatest truth about ourselves, though it needs to be experienced rather than simply talked about.

In reality, the Spirit is in a perpetual state of complete peace, knowledge and joy. The problem is that through the development of our ego and conditionings and by going away from Nature, we have distanced ourselves from our Spirit, identifying ourselves with other aspects of our being such as the body or the mind. 

The second fundamental truth, which is also alluded to in many spiritual writings and scriptures, is that there is an all-pervading power of divine love that does all living work, whether we call it Mother Nature, universal force or divine power. It is this power that makes seeds sprout, flowers bloom and trees grow, according to its own laws.

A rose bush will always produce roses and never daffodils, and trees will grow only up to a certain height. Our eyes are designed like a very delicate camera, and our brain is the most complex computer. All these grow with amazing precision from a tiny cell which, due to some unknown intelligence, is not thrown out of the uterus immediately but it is nourished for nine months and then expelled at the right time. 

I remember once talking to a fellow student at Purdue University, otherwise a remarkably skilled Indian flute player, who firmly believed that life and the universe as we know it are the results of pure chance. He thought that all the harmonious organization of nature, in its minute detail, was a complete accident. I thought he was crazy.

Scientists have determined that if certain constants of the laws of physics such as the speed of light and the gravitational constant had been slightly different than what they are, life would have not been possible on earth. There has to be some sort of intelligent power that organizes and sustains the evolutionary processes in the universe. In fact, one of the most rewarding and fascinating discussions on science I’ve ever had was with a top Romanian scientist was precisely on the topic of science trying to confirm or disconfirm the existence of the divine power. 

Dr. Dumitru Constantin-Dulcan has more qualifications than you can name in a single breath. He is a retired neurosurgeon, professor, army general, and former CEO of Romania’s largest military hospital. But above all, he is a scientist of the highest level, and a man of deep spirituality. As an adolescent in my native Romania, I had read his seminal book The Intelligence of Matter which greatly accelerated my seeking and curiosity for a higher truth beyond the mundane world. Dr. Constantin became my childhood hero.

Then, in January 1997, many years after I had moved to the United States, by pure accident (and here my flute-playing friend from Purdue may have had it right) I had the chance of meeting Dr. Constantin in India, at a Sahaja Health Research Center near Mumbai. The center was remarkable in that one could not find there even a stethoscope or any medical machinery, as all diagnosis and treatment was administered on the basis of the subtle awareness and curative powers given by the practice of meditation.

Dr. Constantin had been invited to the center by Shri Mataji. He had met her in Bucharest for only a few minutes and had felt moved and intrigued by the meeting, desiring to find out more about the health benefits of Sahaja method of meditation. As for me, I happened to be visiting the research center for a few weeks during the same period of time. As he did not speak English fluently and I was the only other Romanian there, I was happy to serve as a translator in his conversations with Dr. U. C. Rai, then head of the Sahaja Health Center, who was another remarkable long-time scientist and medical practitioner. Needless to say, I was completely fascinated by the conversations that took place between these two scientific giants.

During the evenings, Dr. Constantin and I would spend a lot of leisurely time shooting the breeze, discussing various subjects that astounded me. Imagine the delight of meeting face to face one of your childhood heroes and getting to spend hours, even days, talking to him about the most fascinating subjects!

During one of those conversations he told me how in his youth he was a fervent atheist, and he wanted to get scientific proof that God didn’t exist. He jumped at an opportunity that presented itself when a scientist from Europe wrote a thesis, as part of his application for the Nobel Prize in physics, which addressed that precise topic. Dr. Constantin immersed himself in studying these writings, but the more he read, the more he realized that the thesis, while trying to scientifically disprove the existence of God, ended up indicating that a higher power did in fact exist! It was then that his seeking for a the ultimate truth began. He also realized pretty quickly that he could not satisfy his quest through reading or mental analysis only, but that experimentation was needed.

Many seekers of truth realize at some point on their journey that the many types of approaches tried so far have failed to give an answer to the problematic aspect of human existence. Otherwise, after hundreds and thousands of years of trying these myriad solutions, by now the issues plaguing humankind would have been resolved on a global level. On the contrary, it seems that the human crisis is deepening all around the planet. After the unsuccessful attempts to remedy this multi-faceted problem through religious, scientific, social and economic reforms, it is becoming increasingly apparent that the true solution must be based on an inner transformation, as opposed to all external efforts attempted so far. For example, peace is not an abstract concept to be strived for at a global level, tackled only through diplomatic efforts. Peace has to be achieved first within each individual before it can manifest at the collective level. 

How is this inner transformation to be achieved? 

Some seekers search on their own, but the path is long and arduous, and there are many dead ends. Others are fortunate enough to find a spiritual teacher, a guru. But there are pitfalls here as well. False masters abound these days, in their greedy search for gullible seekers who will innocently open their purses hoping for a secret formula that will give them salvation – only to end up broke and sick.

True gurus are few, and many of them keep out of the limelight. Becoming a disciple of an authentic master is not easy. First of all, the selection itself is a grueling process and very few are chosen. A guru might have only one disciple, or perhaps a handful. Even if selected by the guru, the disciple has to pass through many difficult tests as he or she strives towards the distant goal of enlightenment. Very few are the ones who eventually achieve it, and even if they do, they do not know how to pass it on to others.

A real master will never live on the earnings of his or her disciples. A person who lives on the income of others can be called a parasite, but not a guru. If we weed out all so-called masters and “spiritual institutions” that charge money or “love donations” for their services, no matter how big or small the amount, we will have eliminated the vast majority of such movements mushrooming in the marketplace.

I remember how in the Spring of 1990, right after the fall of communism in Romania and before I had discovered Sahaja Yoga Meditation, I went with a few of my seeking friends to attend a yoga program where several local “masters”, who had been outlawed during the communist times, were going to give a public presentation.

I had been seeking for a number of years, had tried several techniques, had read a ton of books spanning the world’s religions, yoga systems, Zen, and many other spiritual paths, and had finally arrived at the conclusion that trying to mash the common truths of all these paths in my head was not going to give me what I sought. I needed something more: an actual experience.

All I could remember from that program was how the self-styled gurus were fighting for the microphone and not being very friendly among themselves or with the people in the audience who were asking questions. These horrible so-called masters were clearly trying to divide the “market” of seekers between themselves. I left disgusted and vowed to not go to any such meetings again.

Fortunately, several months later I came across a friend whom I trusted, who told me that he had been practicing a form of meditation called Sahaja for a month or two, and he had already felt a big difference in his life. He said that this was different from the other movements out there, and it was about the connection with your inner Self. I decided to give it a try, and went to the program with my parents. I received my Self realization on August 1, 1990, and that evening changed my life. Everything that happened afterwards confirmed the gut feeling I had that evening that “This Is It.”

Chapter 2. The Beginning
In the early morning hours on the 5th of May in the year 1970 something extraordinary happened. A spiritual personage of the highest caliber opened the path towards the collective achievement of a new dimension of awareness called Self realization.

Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi was born on March 21, 1923 to a Christian family descending from the Indian Shalivahana royal dynasty. Her birth, precisely at noon on the spring equinox, and at the geographical center of India, was marked by an extraordinary planetary alignment. She knew from a very young age that she had a unique gift that was to be made available to all who seek it. 

Shri Mataji and her family played a key role in the movement of India’s liberation from under the British rule. A youth leader in the struggle for her country’s independence, she grew up in Mahatma Gandhi’s ashram. Gandhi recognized her profundity even at her young age, and sometimes consulted with her on matters of spirituality. Shri Mataji’s father, Prasad K. Salve, a renowned scholar and master of fourteen languages, was a distinguished lawyer and the only Christian member of India’s Constituent Assembly. Her mother, Cornelia Salve, was the first woman in India to receive an honors degree in mathematics.

Shri Mataji’s parents knew that she had a special spiritual task to achieve, and as she was growing up they helped her understand the deep and manifold problems facing humankind. 

Shri Mataji pursued medical studies in Lahore and shortly after India’s independence she married Sir C. P. Srivastava, one of India’s living legends, who became the Joint Secretary to India’s Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri, the successor of Jawaharlal Nehru. Later on, Mr. Srivastava served for sixteen years as the Secretary General of the United Nations International Maritime Organization. He became the Founding Chancellor Emeritus of the World Maritime Organization, was knighted by the Queen of England for his remarkable achievements, and received numerous international awards and recognitions. 

In 1970, after seeing her children reach adulthood and having fulfilled her responsibilities as a mother and a householder, Shri Mataji embarked on her life’s true mission – the spiritual emancipation of individuals and of society through Sahaja Yoga meditation. 

Sahaja (saha = with, ja = born) means spontaneous, built-in, or inborn. Sahaja meditation effortlessly establishes the connection of the individual to the all-pervading power through the phenomenon of Self realization. Self realization, or the actualization of our inner Self, takes place through the awakening of a subtle spiritual energy residing in every human being called Kundalini – we shall learn more about this energy and its remarkable qualities in later chapters. 

The word yoga in Sanskrit means “union” – union of the individual consciousness with the collective consciousness – even though in the West the term has been commercialized and now yoga loosely refers to a set of physical exercises and breathing techniques. As a result, in the United States many people who saw advertisements about Sahaja Yoga used to show up with exercise mats and wearing gym clothes. Therefore, it was decided to use the name “Sahaja Meditation” instead so that newcomers could get a clearer understanding of what to expect. Henceforth we will use the terms Sahaja Yoga and Sahaja Meditation interchangeably.

Shri Mataji started Sahaja Yoga in 1970 by first giving individual Self realization to a few eager seekers of truth in India. En-masse Self realization started when the first group of twelve seekers received their Kundalini awakening simultaneously. Sahaja Yoga spread very quickly in the small villages of India, where innocent, simple people were ready to receive this spiritual gift with an open heart. Shortly afterwards, Shri Mataji’s husband was appointed as the Secretary General of the U.N. Maritime Organization and London became their home. The first group of seven Western seekers of truth received their Self realization and became Sahaja Yogis (practitioners of Sahaja Yoga meditation).

Initially Sahaja Yoga spread across Europe and in North America. Shri Mataji was very eager to save the American seekers from the clutches of the false gurus who had invaded the United States and were looting people in the name of spirituality. In 1972 she sold her golden jewelry to fund a tour of America and set sail across the Atlantic. In hall after hall she held programs, but her message fell on deaf ears, as the seekers of those times were too naive to realize that truth could be obtained without paying fabulous sums of money.

In 1989, after the Iron Curtain fell, Sahaja Yoga spread in Russia and the Eastern Block countries, where thousands filled stadiums and large halls to listen to Shri Mataji’s lectures and receive their Self realization. 

I first met Shri Mataji in October 1990, two and a half months after receiving my Self realization at a public program. All of us Sahaja Yogis had gathered at the Otopeni airport in Bucharest to receive her on her first visit to Romania, and we were all excited like little children. She melted our hearts when she appeared with a beaming smile, wearing a scarf that was tied around her head in a traditional Romanian style. Each of us in turn offered her flowers, and the moment I offered mine is a moment I will never forget. Even today I can just see her radiant face, looking at me with motherly love as she received the little flower I offered from my heart.

Until she reached the age of eighty, Shri Mataji traveled the world giving free public programs. Thousands experienced their Self realization effortlessly in her presence. She has never charged any money for her selfless work, insisting that you cannot pay for the knowledge of truth, nor for a living process which takes place within us: the growth of our awareness. Today, Sahaja Yoga is established on all continents and is coming with full force into the attention of the scientific, political, ecological and spiritual spheres as a way to solve today’s crises from within.

For her universal vision of a unified humanity and her extraordinary global work, Shri Mataji has been nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize. She was recognized and honored by governments of many nations for her unique contributions which continue to improve the lives of hundreds of thousands on a daily basis.

Shri Mataji’s profound wisdom and insights have been a source of inspiration to many political and spiritual leaders. Lal Bahadur Shastri, India’s second Prime Minister after Jawaharlal Nehru, had tremendous respect for her and often sought her guidance on economical and political matters. In 1997, separate tributes were paid to Shri Mataji by Claes Nobel (Chairman of United Earth and grandnephew of Alfred Nobel, creator of the Nobel Foundation), and Ayatollah Rouhani (leader of the Shiia Muslim faith in Europe) at the Royal Albert Hall in London.

In addition to founding Sahaja Yoga meditation, Shri Mataji has distinguished herself as a great humanitarian by creating a number of non-governmental organizations, including:

An international Sahaja Health Research Center in Mumbai, India, dedicated to alleviating illnesses through Sahaja Yoga meditation techniques.
An international Academy of the Arts in Vaitarna, India.
A charitable organization in New Delhi to provide shelter to destitute and homeless people.
An international theater company – the Theater of Eternal Values – whose international cast and crew has successfully toured throughout Europe, Australia, Israel, India and the United States. Its mission is to produce performances that promote the universal values of a global culture. 
Within the sphere of medicine, significant findings attributing Sahaja Yoga meditation to a reduction in asthmatic incidents have been published in scientific journals by a reputed Australian physician, Dr. Ramesh Manocha. In addition, Manocha’s work with Sahaja Yoga has shown positive results in managing Attention Deficit Disorder. Dr. Manocha joins the ranks of numerous medical professionals around the world researching the positive impact of Sahaja Yoga on diseases such as cancer, epilepsy, high blood pressure, asthma, and others. In India, Russia and Australia there are health centers which exclusively employ Sahaja methods for curative purposes. 

In August 1995, I went with my wife Barbara to Bucharest when I heard that Shri Mataji was going to visit Romania anew. During that visit, the Ecological University of Bucharest invited Shri Mataji to speak at a conference organized specifically for Sahaja Yoga meditation, where several prominent Romanian academicians were present. The room was full beyond capacity, and many Sahaja Yogis had to wait outside. I remember how spellbound everyone was after Shri Mataji spoke, and at the end, the President of the University excused himself and left the room. He returned shortly with a diploma for a Doctorate degree in Cognitive Sciences, which Shri Mataji graciously accepted. This was not an honorary diploma, but an actual degree, awarded based on the extraordinary knowledge of the field of Cognitive Sciences that Shri Mataji demonstrated.

Also in 1995, Shri Mataji was an official guest of the Chinese government invited to speak to the people of China at the Women’s International Conference in Beijing. This was another historic moment that highlighted the important role of women in spirituality, peace, and global integration.

In the United States, Shri Mataji’s unique contributions have been recognized and honored by the United States Congress. She has spoken at the United Nations on four occasions, between 1989 and 1994, on ways to achieve world peace. Sahaja Meditation is also offered in Washington D.C. at the National Institutes of Health which, in addition to offering ongoing weekly programs in Sahaja Meditation, has hosted two seminars on the health benefits of this meditation system which were attended by over five hundred medical professionals. Sahaja Meditation programs and workshops are offered weekly in over fifty cities in the United States in public, private and governmental institutions including community and state colleges, libraries, corporations, prisons, drug rehabilitation centers, and hospitals. Sahaja Meditation instruction is always free of charge, as a community service, offered through by the local chapters of the Sahaja Yoga meditation non-profit organization.

Through the daily practice of Sahaja Meditation, Self realization brings about a deep, positive transformation on all levels of the individual: physical, mental, emotional and spiritual.

Self realization is the enlightenment that connects us with the Spirit residing in our heart. The main difference between the Sahaja style and other spiritual practices is that in Sahaja Meditation, Self realization is achieved on day one, without any prior preparation, while traditional practices involve an arduous journey until the point of Self realization is reached. All saints and sages of the past underwent such long preparations before achieving their Self realization. For example, Buddha meditated and undertook severe penances for several years before he sat one day under a banyan tree and achieved a state of total Self realization.

Because we achieve our Self realization from day one, without going through prior purifications of our subtle system, this connection is not complete from the beginning. Due to our hectic lifestyle, environment, and many other factors that have constricted our subtle system, very few strands of the Kundalini energy pass through our energy centers and emerge through the fontanel bone area at the top of the head. Qualitatively it is the same experience that Buddha and other enlightened sages achieved – and fortunately for us in these special modern times it can be achieved effortlessly – but quantitatively there is still a lot of work we need to do in order to reach our full potential.

Fortunately, after Self realization and the awakening of our Kundalini energy, our subtle work of inner purification and spiritual evolution becomes much easier. Before we become connected with our Self, trying to improve our inner being is like trying to clean a room in the dark. We stumble around, knocking over furniture, missing dusty corners and doing a lackluster job. After we achieve our connection through Self realization, it is as if a little light has been lit and we begin to see where the major problem areas are inside ourselves. We now have the power to correct them by using the energy of this lamp that has been lit within. Moreover, as the room becomes cleaner, the light increases, significantly accelerating the process of growth and self-improvement.

The connection we achieve through Self realization needs to be nourished and strengthened through our attention, introspection and regular meditation. As this connection with our Self grows, our inner being becomes more and more enlightened and as a result all human qualities that are innate within us start manifesting spontaneously in our lives. It is a living process like the sprouting of a seed that gradually grows into a tree – the tree of our enlightened awareness. We only need to have patience with ourselves to allow this living process to unfold.

Nourished by our daily meditation through this process we effortlessly become moral, forgiving, compassionate, dynamic, confident, open-hearted, humble, innocent, pure, child-like, creative, having a good attention, pure knowledge, and expressing all the qualities of the Self or Spirit. Moreover, we achieve balance in all the aspects of our life. These are all qualities of the Spirit and they always existed within us, some more manifest and some more dormant. The ultimate goal is the achievement of a state of total Self realization, in which the union with the all-pervading power is complete and fully manifested in our lives. 

When this transformation occurs at the collective level, society will be transformed. First, one becomes aware of the root cause of problems which can always be found in one form or another in the energy centers, and such problems get corrected through regular meditation, introspection, and through Sahaja Meditation techniques. 

Once our Self realization is established, our collective consciousness develops. We become aware of the subtle causes of the problems of our fellow human beings and of our society as a whole. Our desire to help our communities and the environment we live in develops spontaneously. We start giving this gift of Self realization to others and we become vehicles of the all-pervading power that flows through us. It is only through the transformation of each individual that our society can be healed and transformed, and this transformation has to start from within. The first step is raising our awareness to a new level through the awakening of our Kundalini energy.

Sahaja Meditation is not yet another mental concept or philosophy, but first and foremost a living, direct experience of the divinity within and around us. It is a journey to the roots of what we are – the pure, eternal Spirit.

In the next chapter we will explore the subtle, quintessential mechanism that the Divine has placed within us for our spiritual evolution and ultimately for our union with the power that created us.

Chapter 3. The Mechanism
“The most difficult part is to convince a human being that in the entire creation, he is the most highly evolved being; that he is capable of becoming a glorious personality, a beautiful, peaceful angel.”

— Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi1

What is the subtle mechanism that controls our body, mind, emotions, and in general manages our existence?

Inside every human being there is a network of nerves and sensory organs that interprets the outside physical world. At the same time, within us resides a subtle system of channels (nadis) and centers of energy (chakras) that parallels the nervous system, looking after our physical, intellectual, emotional and spiritual life. 

As mentioned in the previous chapter, in the triangular bone called sacrum (Figure 3.1) located at the base of the spine resides the Kundalini energy. Perhaps the sacrum bone owes its name to the fact that the ancient civilizations knew about this motherly and soothing spiritual energy.


Figure 3.1

The Kundalini is a feminine energy that is dormant in most people. Self realization is the awakening of the Kundalini through the central channel, piercing through the six chakras above it (the first chakra is below the sacrum bone) and emerging at the top of the head (fontanel bone area) as a gentle “fountain” of coolness. The word fontanel itself means “little fountain” which shows again the ancient knowledge about this phenomenon of Self realization.

The Kundalini also represents the power of pure desire within us. We have many desires which, in accordance with the laws of economics, are in general not satiable. Today we want a house, after we get the house we want a swimming pool, after that perhaps a helicopter. The list never ends. However, as psychologist Abraham Maslow noted, once our basic desires are fulfilled, we gradually start desiring subtler things that belong to the intellectual and emotional realms, and ultimately lead to our seeking of the spiritual realm. There is however one desire, which is the purest and, if fulfilled, can sate all our other desires because it gives us complete satisfaction: the pure desire to become one with our Spirit. The fulfillment of this desire starts with our achievement of Self realization. The Kundalini is the power of that pure desire, which we feel as a subtle urge to grow spiritually and achieve our destiny as human beings.

Though it was extremely difficult to attain in the past, Self realization has been described, often through metaphors and parables, in all major spiritual traditions of the world. Now, through Sahaja Meditation, it can be achieved spontaneously and effortlessly. In Shri Mataji’s words: “Kundalini cures you, she improves you, she bestows all the blissful things upon you. She takes you away from the worries of the grosser level.”

“Actually, Kundalini is everybody’s individual Mother. She has tape-recorded all the information about our past and about our inspirations, also our aspirations. […] When this power […] rises and passes through six centers, it nourishes these centers which are meant for our physical, mental, emotional and spiritual requirements. The centers reflect their new state on the genes.”2

We are made like a divine computer with everything built-in – yet before Self realization we are not yet connected to the power source. Self realization is the connection to the mains, which opens a new, spiritual dimension to our awareness. It is an entirely natural and effortless process, just like the sprouting of a seed. It is not a mental concept or a system of thought, rather an actual experience that has to take place within us.

The manifestation of the Kundalini energy is called vibrations, which do not refer to the mechanical or physical meaning of the word, but rather to the manifestation of Kundalini as a gentle cool breeze coming out of the top of our head and from our palms after we experience our Self realization. 


Figure 3.2

Subtle centers

Our seven subtle centers, the chakras, govern all the aspects of our life, from the physical to the mental, emotional and spiritual levels of our being. A physical or mental illness or an emotional disorder is the result of a prolonged imbalance in one or more of the chakras or left and right energy channels (which will henceforth be called as the left and right sides). If we can feel the state of our subtle system and detect such imbalances early on when they are triggered, and if we can cure the imbalance at the energetic and spiritual level, we can prevent many physical and mental problems in our being. This ability to diagnose and alleviate problems at their root cause becomes possible after Self realization.

Each of the seven chakras has several qualities, such as wisdom, creativity, peace, confidence, love, forgiveness, etc., which will be discussed in detail in the following chapters. These qualities are intact within us, and even though they might not always be manifest, they can never be destroyed. When the Kundalini energy is awakened through Self realization, these qualities start manifesting spontaneously and express themselves in our life. Thus, through regular meditation, we automatically become very dynamic, creative, confident, and at the same time humble, loving and compassionate. It is a process that starts to develop by itself when the Kundalini rises and begins to enlighten our chakras. 

What is meditation? 

Contemporary dictionaries tend to use definitions centered around the concept of thought. Classical definitions point to meditation being a state of silence, or absence of thought. The state of meditation achieved in Sahaja Yoga is that of mental silence, when one is fully aware, yet without any thought – a state called “thoughtless awareness.” Normally this is very difficult to accomplish, which is perhaps why today there are so many other meanings attributed to the word “meditation” such as concentration on an image or thought, contemplation, musing about a subject, or simply relaxing and letting your mind wander freely. 

Nevertheless, thoughtless awareness can be achieved spontaneously (Sahaja) when the Kundalini passes through the sixth center located in the center of the head. Even if in the beginning we are able to achieve this mental silence for just a split second, this state can be gradually established and expanded through regular meditation. However, Self realization (the rising of the Kundalini energy through the top of the head) needs to be first achieved.

Our mind keeps us away from reality through the continuous chatter of thoughts coming from the ego (left brain, responsible with thoughts about the future) and superego (right brain, producing thoughts about the past). Throughout the day, our attention oscillates between the past ( “I remember this happening when …”) and the future (“I’m going to meet this person and tell him this,” “next year I am planning to do this”) but we are rarely, if ever, in the present moment. 

Think about it: if right now we are thinking about what will happen in five minutes, and after five minutes we start thinking about now (which will then become “five minutes ago”), when have we truly lived? Doesn’t it look like that those who always live either in the past or the future are those who have never actually lived?

In the state of meditation we go beyond the thoughts and the mind, and are automatically in the present moment because there is no thought. We observe everything like a witness, but we do not react. The silent witness in us is the Spirit, with which we become connected through Self realization. Meditation is a special state, because we are relaxed and alert at the same time.

Studies comparing experienced meditators compared to controls or short-term meditators have demonstrated physiological changes during meditation suggestive of a wakeful hypometabolic state that is characterized by decreased sympathetic nervous activity, important for fight and flight mechanisms, and increased parasympathetic activity, important for relaxation and rest. This wakeful hypometabolic state with parasympathetic dominance has been shown to be qualitatively and quantitatively different from simple rest or sleep.

A series of studies conducted by Prof. U. C. Rai from the Department of Physiology at the University of Delhi have shown that Sahaja Meditation when compared to another (control) form of meditation elicits a reduction in stress-related physiological parameters than indicate an increase of the parasympathetic nervous system, important for rest and relaxation3. This included a reduction in heart, respiratory and pulse rates, of systolic blood pressure, and oxygen metabolism, and of urinary vanilly-mandelic acid (VMA) and increases skin resistance. 

These physiological alterations are indicators of deep parasympathetic activation and therefore physiological relaxation that have been related to stress relief and may have a role in the prevention of stress-related illness, such as respiratory, hypertensive of cardiovascular disease.

In fact, the same physiological effects achieved with Sahaja Meditation in healthy individuals, could also be achieved in patients with epilepsy and with asthma and hypertension after 4 weeks of meditation training, which furthermore were related to the significant reduction of asthma/epilepsy attacks.


Figure 3.3

A study conducted in Australia by Dr. Ramesh Manocha and colleagues showed that long-term Sahaja meditators compared to a group of subjects who practiced simple relaxation showed a reduction in the temperature of their hands during the meditation (shown in the down-sloping curve in the figure below; the slightly upward-sloping curve shows the relatively stable skin temperature of the control group). This correlates with the subjective feelings of coolness in the hands and on top of the brain that is experienced by Sahaja meditators and has been related to an activation of the parasympathetic-limbic pathway.


Figure 3.4

Another study conducted at McMaster’s University in Toronto4 showed that Sahaja Meditation elicited significant increases in beta-endorphins for both male and female subjects (in male subjects, these neurochemicals that are related to the feeling of happiness and euphoria increased by 70%). Beta-endorphins are also released during high-performance sports and when people are in love. They are thought to play an important role in homeostatic mechanisms, pain reduction and may even affect the immune system, which could explain why practitioners of Sahaja Meditation experience improvement in severe illnesses such as asthma, high blood pressure, epilepsy and others (more on this in subsequent chapters).

In a speech given on July 10, 1984 at Chiswick Town Hall in London, Shri Mataji explained: “So the attention has to be purified, but that you don’t have to do – your Kundalini itself purifies your attention. […] Now how do you remove the thought from your mind is the problem. Thoughts are all the time in your mind. […] A thought rises and falls off, and another thought rises and falls off. But when the Kundalini rises, then what happens is that these thoughts become elongated and that starts some work inside. And there is a gap in between and this gap is the place of our peace. 

If you achieve that peace, the world peace can be achieved. By just taking placards, by shouting for peace, you cannot establish peace. Peace has to come from the hearts of human beings. In the hearts of human beings peace can be only established when you establish the Spirit within its core, where it manifests the bliss of peace. When you start enjoying the bliss of peace you don’t want wars, you don’t think of a war and that is the state where now the human beings have to rise and go to.”

The next chapters go into greater depth to discuss the seven centers and three channels of energy, their causes of blockage and methods by which they can be purified and brought back into balance.

Chapter 4. Mooladhara
The first chakra named Mooladhara (moola = root, dhara = support) is placed below the base of the spine (in men its location corresponds to the prostate gland). This energy center looks like a lotus with four petals which symbolize its sterling qualities of innocence, purity, wisdom and joy. The principle this center stands for is that of the eternal childhood which is always present in us. The child in us may be covered by the clouds of cunningness, impure desires or perversions, but it can never be destroyed or tarnished. No matter how much a person goes against it, this principle of eternal childhood can always be reawakened and enlightened through Self realization. 

Childlike innocence cannot be described. It is best felt in the state of thoughtless awareness – it is innocence that puts children always in the present moment, as they like to simply play no matter where they are, without thinking of the past or the future like the adults get into the habit of doing. Innocence is the basis of the love between mother and child. It is the pure state of a child who enjoys thoroughly the present moment. It is simplicity and spontaneity devoid of any artificial behavior or ulterior motives. People who have innocence are automatically joyous and satisfied in life.

Wisdom can be found in the qualities of innocence and purity. That is why we can sometimes see the innate wisdom shining in little children, who don’t have any time, inclination or energy to waste on being cunning. Their wisdom guides them spontaneously, and innocent people have a built-in capacity to guide themselves and distinguish what is good from what is bad for them.

On the physical level, the center of Mooladhara corresponds to the pelvic plexus and controls the reproduction system as well as all functions of excretion. It is notable that this chakra is placed below the Kundalini, which is indicative of the fact that sex has nothing to do with spirituality. In fact, when the Kundalini rises, all excretion stops. So-called spiritual practices that advocate the attainment of Self realization through sexual practices can seriously damage our chances of ascent by throwing this first center deeply out of balance.

Sexual activity is a natural, spontaneous happening that is best manifested in the balance of married life, which is a union that is sanctified and sanctioned collectively by the society. Any excesses in this aspect or thinking about sex can lead to an imbalance in the left side which can ultimately lead to the so-called secret diseases. Complete abstinence is another form of abnormal behavior which is at the other extreme that should be avoided as it can lead to imbalances in the right side of the Mooladhara chakra, making one’s personality very dry. Having a normal married life is the best way to keep this center in balance.

Too much interest in sex through our mind or eyes has the effect of reducing its spontaneity and can ultimately result in impotency. This is an activity that cannot be performed with the brain, and involving the brain in it can spoil and pervert it, especially if started early in life. School education about sexuality, which is widespread in most Western countries, has the unfortunate effect of awakening a premature interest in this subject at an age when children should be left to fully develop the strength of their innocence that will help them tremendously throughout their life. Also, the bombardment of pornography in all forms of mass media is responsible for inciting unhealthy interest which can ultimately cause physical problems in men and mental disorders in women.

Innocence is magnetic. Children are magnetic in that their sweetness and purity attract us naturally and give us happiness. The company of an innocent person will always be sought after, because it is so joy giving. This magnetism is also present in the Mother Earth as well as in animals, especially birds, who can find their way by using their innate magnetic sense. However, in our modern times the magnetism of the Mooladhara is sometimes used in a wrong way by women who try to attract men and men who are looking at women in an impure way, which in the long term can seriously affect the balance and cleanliness of our subtle energetic system.

Innocence is at the basis of all spirituality. A master who lacks innocence cannot be an authentic teacher but can become a horrid personality, because the essence of the principle of the guru is innocence. Innocent people may be cheated by cunning persons, but in the end innocence always prevails because it is in and of itself such a powerful force. This quality can be seen in children who always forget the people who hurt them, while remembering only the people who love them. Unlike adults who are experts at making themselves feel miserable, children appear to not want to remember bad things, and this is what keeps them in a perpetual state of joy.

The element corresponding to the Mooladhara chakra is earth. There are certain mountains and rock formations that came out of the Mother Earth which emit vibrations, such as Mount Uluru in Australia and Mount Matterhorn in Switzerland, shown below.


Figure 4.1 

Mount Uluru, Australia


Figure 4.2 

Mount Matterhorn, Switzerland

The four-petalled Mooladhara chakra corresponds to the tetravalent carbon atom, which is the basis of all life. All living organisms have built-in wisdom coming from the principle of the Mooladhara that guides them in their evolution. For example, at the tip of each root there is a little cell that has intelligence which guides it around the rocks it encounters on its path in such a way that eventually the root surrounds the rocks and encroaches itself on them.

This innate wisdom also exists in human beings, guiding us through our life. By being innocent, we can instinctively see what is good and what is bad for our Spirit and we get the strength to always follow the path of goodness. If on the other hand we cloud our Mooladhara chakra’s power of innocence and wisdom through artificial or cunning behavior, our life can become confused and we may without realizing it steer towards disaster.

Within every being or object there are also certain innate limits or laws of behavior. For example, steel will not break but glass will, wood will float on the water, and so on, because these materials have built-in within themselves the qualities to act that way. Flowers always bloom in the same season and following the same pattern. A tiger will never behave like a snake and a snake will never behave like a tiger. 

In the same way, human beings have built-in within themselves certain boundaries and taboos. For example, we have a sense of shame and self-awareness that animals don’t have. A dog may pass through a very dirty street without being bothered by it, but a human being may not. One of the differences between human beings and animals is that due to our free will, we can cross our innate limits and go to any extremes of unnatural, aberrant behavior. Animals cannot do that as they are bound by the laws of nature, and therefore are innocent. Only human beings have ego and can transgress their own inner laws.

A wise and innocent person will automatically stay within their natural boundaries. For example, such a person will never be interested in nudity or impure things due to their built-in sense of shame and modesty, which somehow alerts them that this is wrong. In fact, such behavior goes against the Mooladhara and in the long run can result in some of the incurable diseases related to this center.

Innocence is such a powerful force which in and of itself protects children and childlike, innocent people. Some years ago, we were neighbors with another family of Sahaja Yogis who had a child barely out of his toddler years. One day, the boy fell out of their balcony and, despite the fact that he fell a couple stories, he was miraculously completely unharmed.

There are several ways we can help cleanse our Mooladhara chakra. One is sitting on the earth, which absorbs all negativity from our subtle system and especially from the Mooladhara. Keeping the hands on the Mother Earth also helps clear the chakras, since they are all represented on our palms, which are like maps of our subtle system.

The health benefits of Sahaja Meditation are far-reaching and multi-faceted, an example being a study conducted at the Sydney Menopause Centre, Royal Hospital for Women, Australia, showed that Sahaja Meditation is effective as treatment for menopausal symptoms5.

Sahaja Meditation was taught for 8 weeks, twice-weekly, in a group of women with menopausal symptoms, instead of providing them with the more traditional treatment of hormone replacement therapy for the management of menopausal hot flushes.

Improvements were observed in the frequency of hot flushes, which were reduced to 67% below the baseline frequency rate. At follow up, it was still 57% below baseline (a reduction in hot flashes frequency of 50% is considered an improvement). Significant improvements also occurred in a Climacteric Scale, the Menopause Quality of Life Questionnaire, and both State and Trait Anxiety subscales. Sahaja Meditation was shown to be an attractive option for women with menopausal symptoms because they prefer non-pharmacological treatments, thereby avoiding the risks and side effects of hormone replacement therapy.

The region on the hand corresponding to this first center of Mooladhara is the heel of the palm, near the wrist. The region of the head corresponding to the Mooladhara is at the back of the head (which also corresponds to the back of the sixth chakra called Agnya), which is the area of the brain where images seen with our eyes are “projected.” Due to the strong connection between these two centers, impure images we see or impure thoughts we have can affect the back of the Agnya chakra, and the negativity thus absorbed can lodge itself onto the Mooladhara. Watching the sky and green grass can help the back Agnya as well as the Mooladhara. The innocence of Mother Nature can be absorbed and used to cleanse the impurities in our subtle system.

Shri Mataji on Mooladhara6: “There have been stories that children who have fallen from a very great height were completely saved, nothing happened to them. Their innocence is such a powerful thing that it doesn’t harm anyone who is not to be harmed. It has all the wisdom of the world, all the understanding of the world. […]

You can see in your own lives around you, when anybody tries to trouble children – all of the them, whoever they are, whatever may be their nationality – they all jump, all jump to safeguard that child. What is it? What is it within us that makes us so very conscious to protect the innocence? 

It’s really a shame, a great shame for us, when we find in this world that innocence is under attack. Anything else can be tolerated. Innocent people who have done nothing wrong, those who have no malice, who are living like little children, I should say, if they are attacked by anyone – not that the whole world reacts to that – but everyone of them cannot bear any innocent person or innocent being, being harmed.

We don’t realize that, within us, there is the ocean of love and ocean of understanding for children. Why? Why should it be? Why should we feel like that, especially for children? Especially for innocence? There are people who are always attacking innocent people, innocent children – there are, but no one wants to support them. No one thinks that it’s proper to ill-treat children. And those who have done this have to suffer. They all suffer as a reaction.”

Chapter 5. Swadhishthan
The second chakra, Swadhishthan, is located in the lower abdomen, a couple of inches under the navel. It is the center of creation, arts and learning. Each chakra has three sides – one on the left, one on the right, and one in the center, expressing different qualities and looking after different organs. On the left side, the quality of Swadhishthan is pure knowledge, on the right side it is pure attention, and in the center it is pure creativity.

On the physical level, the Swadhishthan corresponds to the aortic plexus. It governs the intestines and many organs in our abdomen such as part of the liver, intestines, kidneys, uterus, and as such can cause many diseases if it goes out of balance. To understand how these diseases are triggered at the subtle level, we need to first understand the role this center plays in our mental processes. 

Besides looking after the lower abdomen, the Swadhishthan breaks down the fat cells in our abdomen and supplies the resulting energy to the brain for our thinking. If we think too much, this chakra is forced to neglect nourishing the organs in the abdomen in favor of giving energy to the brain. Such imbalances can cause a host of ailments such as diabetes, kidney disorders, liver problems, colon diseases and so on.

For example, it is well known that diabetes can be triggered by mental and emotional strain. Actually, through the knowledge and practice of Sahaja Meditation we arrive at the realization that it is our thinking that often causes diabetes, and not the sugar we eat. In developing countries like as India, people eat large quantities of sugar but because they lead a more balanced and stress-free life and they don’t think as much as in the West, diabetes is a much less frequent occurrence than in Western countries.

One of the most important organs governed by the right side of the Swadhishthan (together with the third chakra) is the liver, which is the main organ of the right side. On the gross level, the liver performs various functions that include neutralizing the toxins in our body. On the subtle level, this organ sustains our attention. If we think, organize and plan too much, if we live too much in the future instead of the present moment, our restless attention drains the energy of the liver which starts neglecting its other functions. The Swadhishthan is now busy supplying energy to the brain to cater to our thinking instead of being able to look after the organs in the abdomen that it normally supplies with energy. As the liver becomes loaded with toxins, it starts to heat up. Heat is the sign of parts of our organism being in trouble, as exemplified by the phenomenon of fever. The heat trapped inside the liver can cause many diseases, but can also escape and rise up the right side to the right side of the Heart chakra, where it can cause asthma, or cross to the left side of the Heart chakra and cause heart problems.

A heated liver is also the sign of an angry, frustrated, even aggressive and violent personality. The heat of the liver can also travel up the right side all the way to the head, where it can bloat the ego causing such people to think no end of themselves. Perhaps that is why such a person is called a “hothead,” as opposed to a balanced, detached person, who is “cool.” In fact, the cool vibrations of the Kundalini neutralize the heat in the body of a realized soul (person who has their Self realization) and bring him or her into a state of peace, calm and balance.

A person with a hot liver will also have difficulty in concentrating or being in the state of meditation (thoughtless awareness) due to too many thoughts passing at high speed through his or her mind. For the same reason, such overactive people may also have difficulty in sleeping at night. A hot liver is the main cause of a person being “on the right side” i.e. futuristic, hot-tempered and overactive. Through simple Sahaja Meditation techniques, the right side and all the problems it generates can be cured and brought back into balance.

One of today’s widespread conditions which is the result of imbalances in the Swadhishthan chakra is ADHD (Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder). ADHD is a disorder that develops in childhood and is characterized by problems of attention, impulsiveness and hyperactivity.

A study conducted in Australia, at the Natural Therapies Research Unit of the Royal Hospital for Women in Sydney, and in collaboration with the Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London, UK, showed that Sahaja Meditation yields significant improvement of the symptoms of ADHD7.

The treatment of choice in ADHD is the administration of stimulant medication. However, there are side effects, there is concern about the unknown long-term effects of stimulants on brain development and there is evidence for limited effectiveness that wanes after a few years. For these reasons parents prefer non-pharmacological treatment and there is a search for effective alternative non-pharmacological treatment options.

26 children with ADHD, aged between 4 and 12, were treated for 6 weeks with Sahaja Meditation adjunctive to their usual treatment (i.e. some of them were receiving stimulant medication) and then compared to a waiting list control group who received no treatment.

Children with ADHD who learned how to meditate compared to the waiting list control group showed a significant reduction of the main symptoms of hyperactivity, impulsiveness and inattention. Other secondary benefits were an improved child-parent relationship and enhanced self-esteem in children. Furthermore, of the children who were treated with stimulant medication, over 50% either discontinued or reduced their stimulant medication but still improved in their symptoms. The study also showed that the meditating children improved significantly in their behavior at home and at school.

This pioneering study suggests that Sahaja Meditation is clearly a promising non-pharmacological treatment option for children with ADHD that needs to be further explored.

In addition with being responsible with our attention, concentration and learning, the Swadhishthan is also the center of creativity. Artists have this second chakra well developed, as they use its energy for their artistic expressions. However, this center can be drained if creativity is forced through mental effort, and artists who try to squeeze their creative energy instead of letting it inspire them freely may suffer from the above mentioned physical problems.

On the other hand, realized souls create eternal works of art that emit vibrations, meaning that they have a certain coefficient of vibrations that is in tune with the Divine. For example, geniuses such as Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci were in fact realized souls whose masterpieces have transcended ages. The music of Bach and Handel has the same divine coefficient, while Mozart’s exuberant, spontaneous joy literally creates vibrations. Indian classical music, whether vocal or instrumental, is based on the primordial sound or vibration called AUM, and is very conducive to meditation. Meditating on such music can help us enter the state of thoughtless awareness, as opposed to some of the modern music that can take us to the right side (like rock music) or to the left side (music that tugs at our emotions and makes us feel sad).

However, not all classical music has good vibrations, as not all great composers were realized souls. For example, Wagner’s music actually has bad vibrations. On the other hand, there is also modern music with good vibrations – it all depends on the vibrations of the musician playing it. Such differences can only be identified after Self realization, when one can feel the vibrations in one’s palms. Thus, some of the songs of Bob Dylan, Eric Clapton, Paul McCartney, to name a few – emit cool vibrations since these musicians were born realized souls (their Kundalini was in an awakened state since their birth emitting a gentle cool breeze above their head, whether they were aware of it or not).

The same differentiation applies to all forms of artistic expression including paintings, sculpture, poetry, literature and movies. Unfortunately, the modern times have given way to artistic manifestations that belong more to the domain of the grotesque rather than that of beauty, and which hurt the fine sensitivities of the Swadhishthan chakra. Perhaps it is the critics who cannot draw a single line or utter a musical note who have killed the artists, and maybe what we are seeing now is a reaction, a rebellion against the traditional values of aesthetics that are hard to be found today. 

The vibrations we get from our Kundalini energy after Self realization can awaken many artistic qualities in us and manifest our creativity in a pure way which can sometimes be surprising. My father, who was a chemical engineer and had never written any non-technical books, wrote after starting to practice Sahaja Yoga a scholarly book in two volumes totaling over 1000 pages about the history of spirituality, yoga and meditation, a shorter book about Sahaja Yoga meditation, and a novel in the thriller genre.

With the help of the vibrations of the Kundalini energy, people who could not sing start singing beautifully, people who could not write start writing beautiful poems and prose, people who could not paint start creating beautiful paintings. I am also one such person.

I used to be proverbially bad at painting. My father told me that as a small child I painted a few nice pieces, but after I started first grade any talent I may have had was lost, likely due to the rigid structure of art classes at the time that did not encourage creativity. Any attempts at painting I made later in life were ridiculously bad, even after starting to practice Sahaja Meditation. I knew I could do a decent job playing music, singing, writing poems and prose and making short movies, but always figured that painting was an art that was just not for me – not for this lifetime anyway. 

Until the spring of 2007 when, during a trip to India to attend the festivities of Shri Mataji’s birthday celebration, I had the chance to visit for two weeks a Music and Arts Academy a few hours away from Mumbai. I went there to briefly study a subject called Music Therapy, which uses musical notes and ragas (traditional Indian classical music pieces) to balance the inner subtle system and purify the chakras. I was impressed by the science behind it and the effects, and one day my music teacher, Dr. Arun Apte, a world class musician and music professor from whom I had the chance to take lessons, suggested that in my spare time I should try painting which was being taught in the next room. After several insistences on his part, I walked in the adjacent room. When the painting teacher learned that I had not done any structured painting before and had only three days left before my departure, he shook his head, pulled out a simple lotus drawing and asked me to duplicate it. When I insisted that I had much loftier plans and wanted to paint four girls dancing in a forest with mountains in the background, he shook his head further still but allowed me to proceed. With a bit of help from him and a fellow student, I managed to my surprise to finish the artwork in less than three days and it did not look bad. The teacher looked at it and said “you’ve got potential. You’ve progressed in three days more than an average student would progress in six months.” Addressed to me, the hopelessly bad painter, these words were nothing short of miraculous. I then understood that it was the unique vibrations of that place, on a frequency imbued with artistic qualities, that had allowed me to make that quantum leap in such an incredible short time.

If the central part of the Swadhishthan gives us pure creativity, the left Swadhishthan gives us pure knowledge that is not the result of reading a lot of books, but rather a direct perception of the subtle reality. Such pure knowledge is only possible after Self realization, which is our connection to this ocean of information. Before Self realization, our only cognitive instruments are the mind and the senses, which cannot help us perceive the subtle reality. 

The senses are absolute (everyone will tell you that fire is hot, no difference of opinion there) because they are connected to the central nervous system, however they are limited because just with the five senses one can only perceive the gross world. On the other hand, the mind can deal with subtler aspects which are beyond the senses, but it is relative (everyone has a different opinion about the world, spirituality, etc.) What we need is a “sense,” or cognitive faculty, which is absolute (related to the central nervous system) and at the same time can perceive the subtle reality. This is precisely what Sahaja Meditation gives the practitioner after Self realization.

By reading a lot of books one can become confused if the books are not written by enlightened (realized) people. Unfortunately, most of the books written by the great souls of the past such as Socrates, Lao-tse, Confucius, Gyaneshwara, Kabir, William Blake, Shakespeare, and even the Bible, Koran and Gita, are written in parables the subtle truth of which is hard to grasp. In turn, the present book market has been invaded by books that are written either by authors driven by money and fame, or by well meaning writers who unfortunately do not possess a first hand experience of the subtle knowledge they propound.

Many of the problems of the world are caused by the fact that we have a relative mind, having contradictory ideas that can cause misunderstanding, conflict and even war. Such problems can be solved if everyone reaches the same level of understanding, which is based on the absolute truth rather than relative individual ideas.

Self realization provides a breakthrough solution towards this end, because it enables us to feel the absolute knowledge on our central nervous system. By feeling the cool breeze or the sensations of catches in our palms and fingers, we first get to know ourselves at an essential level, and then, by developing this vibrational awareness, we can get to know the subtle truth about the world around us. For example, we become able to discern a true master from an impostor, or a book that has true knowledge from one that doesn’t.

On the right side of the chakra, the Swadhishthan gives us the pure attention which is devoid of thought. As discussed earlier, the organ that nourishes the attention is the liver. Good attention is essential for achieving the state of thoughtless awareness and feeling the joy of the Spirit. Such an attention is effortless and detached, but at the same time is very effective when called into action.

Modern times seem to correspond to a chaotic condition because they give us so many ways we can waste our attention and energy. Between television, the Internet, huge shopping places filled with thousands of articles and many other distractions, our awareness is drawn into many directions and pulled away from the Spirit. It is very rare that we can find a moment to be with ourselves – and by that I don’t mean watching TV or solving crosswords, but having our attention inside, in silence, in a word just “being” and enjoying the present moment.

“Yesterday is history, tomorrow is a mystery, and today is a gift – that’s why it is called “present.” This saying is well known and appreciated, yet how often do we get to practice it with our attention. This very state of the present is experienced in meditation, once we get our Self realization, and that is why spending some time every day in this state of silence, of thoughtless awareness, is very important. It is about enlightening ourselves every day, a process without which the light inside can go out and be lost.

The element of Swadhishthan is fire, corresponding to the fire of creation and creativity. There are specific techniques to cleanse the Swadhishthan which we will not cover in detail in this introductory book (they are best explained face-to-face at Sahaja Meditation programs which are held throughout the world free of charge), though we would like to mention a few ways to cool off the liver, which is one of the most important aspects of this second chakra. 

One way to break the heat is to drink a lot of water. Also, there are certain types of food that can be avoided since they are of “heating” type8: fatty and oily foods, beef and red meat in general, alcohol in any form and quantity is highly detrimental to the liver, caffeine and other excitants, eggs, and certain fruits like mangoes and bananas. Eating sugar will also help a heated liver cool down. But by far the most important and efficient way to cleanse the liver and relieve a drained Swadhishthan is to stop unnecessary thinking (and a lot of it is unnecessary), especially reducing the constant activities of planning and thinking about a future that does not yet exist. Shri Mataji explains that a fact that seems to be ignored by medical science is that sugar is actually the food of the liver. In rural India, diabetes has extremely low rates despite the fact that villagers drink plenty of sugar cane juice. Diabetes comes from thinking, not from sugar, she explains.

It is also worth mentioning that in certain cases, a person may also suffer from a cold liver. There are certain techniques to be applied for a cold liver, though this is not a frequently encountered imbalance.

Shri Mataji on the Swadhishthan chakra9: “This is the color of the bile within us and this Swadhishthan chakra which is for our creativity is directly connected to that ego there, and […] starts rotating round the Void, and going to the various parts of the Void. The Void is the green circle within us where physically we have the uterus, we have the kidneys. It’s a complete viscera, all the intestines, ascending, transverse and descending colon, the liver – it’s more the upper part of liver – then also pancreas and the spleen. So all the problems of these organs are collected by this chakra which moves. [The Swadhishthan] comes out of the Nabhi chakra, and moves round and round and round, and collects all the problems.

It nourishes and gives power, the vital power, to these organs and also it generates necessary power for our creative action. It also collects the fat cells of the Void and converts them into the power cells for the brain for its use – for the grey matter. All this work it has to do – one chakra. It manifests the aortic plexus outside – on the physical level. We call it as aortic plexus and it has got six sub-plexuses which look after all these organs.

This [chakra] is meant for our action. When we go into action this chakra starts working. By the first power which is on the left hand side, we desire, but by the second one, we go into action […]. Now when this action starts within us it produces the byproducts or we can say all the problems of these organs, which are to be deposited somewhere and they are all deposited in the brain as ego.

All the problems that we have out of this, this creativity, and the action of all these organs are to be counter balanced and as a counter balance the ego develops.”

In another talk, Shri Mataji further explains about this center10: “Especially in England I have seen, also in the west I would say, everywhere, people get very easily tired. On the television also you find people will come [and say], “haaaahhh.” Young people!! They’ll walk ten yards then they’ll say, “haaahhh.” Why are we so tired? Because we think too much! 

All energy is wasted in thinking, so no energy left to enjoy anything whatsoever! For example, you have to have people for dinner, you think ‘what to bring?’, ‘how to make it formal? what to do?’. So agitated, so nervous about the whole thing [that] when the guests come they feel like running away because so much of tension.

Thinking, thinking, thinking, planning, planning, planning, planning, running. Ultimately the whole joy has disappeared. So the second center […] does a very miraculous thing to provide the grey cells in our brain when we are using it for thinking and also it looks after your liver, your pancreas, your spleen, your kidneys and part of your abdomen. Instead of doing that, poor thing is busy only sending grey cells to your brain, because of thinking, thinking, thinking like mad, so you develop all other diseases [like] liver trouble, which is very common.

Then you develop diabetes – very common, yesterday at least, there were ten people who said we have diabetes. Now, diabetes you do not develop by taking too much sugar – take it from me. In India if you go to a village you will see that [a villager] takes sugar in such [a] manner that in the cup the spoon must stand at a right angle otherwise he won’t take [it] and he never gets diabetes! The reason is he doesn’t think of tomorrow, he just works hard, eats his food and sleeps off nicely. He doesn’t take sleeping pills either. So this diabetes comes by over thinking and can be easily cured if you can take to Sahaja Yoga.”

Chapter 6. Nabhi
The Nabhi or Manipur chakra is the third situated behind the navel. The element that corresponds to it is water. The Nabhi is the center of balance, growth and evolution within the limits of the inner laws that govern our life (Dharma, in Sanskrit language). Dharma can also be translated as the path of righteousness, which when followed leads to spiritual evolution and general well-being. This chakra is also the center of inner peace, contentment and satisfaction.

On the physical level, the central part of the Nabhi corresponds to the solar plexus and looks after the stomach, intestines, as well as the digestion. The right Nabhi looks after the liver together with the right Swadhishthan as discussed in the previous chapter. The left Nabhi looks after the spleen, which is the “speedometer” of our body. If we are always on the run, with a sandwich in one hand and driving the car while talking on the cell phone, the left Nabhi goes out of order. We feel stressed out, impatient, and spleen and pancreas disorders can ensue. One of the most serious manifestations of left Nabhi imbalances is blood cancer.

Slowing down, being calm and enjoying the contentment of the Spirit soothes this chakra and brings us peace and balance. In this balance and while observing the Dharma, the boundaries of our inner natural laws, we can grow spiritually and eventually achieve our Self realization. The Nabhi chakra has ten petals which correspond to the ten “valences” or sterling qualities of a human being. They are not just social norms that help us live with each other, but inner laws that when discarded can cut our chances of ascent, and when respected create in our Nabhi chakra the balance needed for our nourishment and evolution.

The left Nabhi also has to do with our household environment, with the peace and harmony in our family and home. The most important role for achieving this balance is played by the wife, who can soothe all conflicts between family members and restore the feeling of tranquility and contentment. On the other hand, if the wife is angry, dominating or complaining all the time, it can have a very bad effect on the left Nabhi principle of the whole family. In the long run, this can affect the health of both the wife and the husband.

Sahaja Meditation has been shown to be notably effective in reducing stress. Stress is commonplace in all professions, even in the medical field. A survey conducted in Australia showed that 60% of GPs (General Practitioners) wanted educational material to help in the management of stress and that 28% of those seeking education were experiencing significant levels of stress11. Also, one in eight GPs had scores indicative of severe psychiatric disturbance, 50% had considered leaving their current practice, and 53% had considered abandoning general practice because of occupational stress12.

A study was conducted at the Royal Hospital for Women in Sydney, Australia13 using quantitative feedback based on the standardized K10 questionnaire (Kessler Psychological Distress Scale – 10) collected before and after a not-for-profit workshop administered to 299 attending physicians who were taught Sahaja Meditation over a period of two weeks. The results indicated Sahaja Meditation as an “effective mental health promotion and prevention strategy.” Among the various metrics collected, the overwhelming majority of participants (over 93%) indicated improvements in various degrees due to the practice of Sahaja Meditation in all areas surveyed: mental silence, calm and peacefulness, and relief from stress, tension and anxiety.

The principal quality of the right Nabhi is royal dignity, which is the principle governing the kings, queens and all the leaders. However, there are some leaders in modern times who seem to have replaced royal dignity and looking after the benevolence of others by a shocking interest in money and personal glory.

The principle of royal dignity is present in each one of us and can be re-awakened even if temporarily put to sleep. It is very evident in small children, whose dignity and self-respect cannot be taken away by anything. This innate dignity goes away when we drink alcohol. In fact, drinking alcohol in any quantity inflicts damage to the Nabhi chakra. While doctors are divided between the opinion that a bit of alcohol is good for you and the view that in the long run it produces a weak heart and poor circulation, anyone who has tried meditation in the true sense of the word (thoughtless awareness) knows that alcohol is poison for the awareness. It is in fact poison for our liver as well, which is the organ that nourishes and sustains our attention. 

Under the influence of alcohol, perception becomes skewed. I heard of someone confessing that after drinking he saw his sister not as his sister, but as his beloved. Since under such circumstances the awareness becomes confused, people use alcohol to “take courage” to perform actions that are later regretted, which could not be carried out in a normal state of consciousness where restraint and dignity govern our behavior. Many acts of violence are committed under the influence of alcohol.

Wellbeing, including financial stability, is one of the byproducts of a good Nabhi chakra in a person or family. However, it is important that money and material objects be taken in the proper perspective. While prosperity can contribute to a certain extent to an enjoyable and stable life, its exclusive pursuit can turn into materialism that negatively affects the Nabhi. The blessing of financial wellbeing can become a curse that ruins the very happiness it was supposed to bestow. People with limited financial resources can be happy if they are satisfied with what they have, while extremely rich people are rarely satisfied since they are either avid for more or worried about their possessions. As is the case with everything, the best is to achieve balance in financial matters as well.

If lust is the enemy of the Mooladhara and anger is the enemy of Swadhishthan, greed is the main enemy of the Nabhi chakra. The best way to overcome this plague is to be extremely generous and in general detached about money. The best use of matter is to give it as a gift, which will give joy both to the receiver and to the giver. Every action, word or thought that opens our heart brings us closer to the Spirit, because the Spirit is the collective being within us.

Nabhi is also the chakra of seeking. The first seeking was for food, and then for satisfying the various needs of life including the need for love, friendship, professional satisfaction, and so on. Once such needs are satisfied, the seeking for spirituality starts. However, as we will see in the following chapter, while walking on the path of seeking it is often difficult to discern between the genuine spiritual masters and the fake ones.

In order to keep the Nabhi chakra balanced, it is best to avoid extremes in our diet, and also to avoid alcohol consumption in any quantity. Any types of recreational drugs including marijuana are very damaging to the Nabhi. And as for any chakra, respecting the sterling qualities of the Nabhi chakra such as generosity, peace, contentment, and above all our innate sense of morality, is of great importance for maintaining this center in a good, balanced state.

Shri Mataji discusses the Nabhi chakra14: “So at the Nabhi chakra, one has to know that one should not hanker after money too much. Now those who hanker too much after money may develop their right side better. They may have money, no doubt, but they miss their left side. […] They are very hectic people, they run about. They run the rat-race, they get heart attacks. If not heart attacks they will get leukemia, they will get diabetes, liver problems – all such diseases.

[…] Attachment to money, attachment to people, attachment to this, is nothing but a hook which hooks you to baser levels. You have to rise above and then you really enjoy the beauty of richness. As I told you the other day, I see all beautiful things, it’s nice that I don’t possess them. 

See now these carpets are spread here. If they were mine I should worry ‘Oh God, I hope they are not going to be spoiled, I hope nobody sits on them, I hope they are insured and nobody runs away with them.’ But when they don’t belong to me I am enjoying them better – other people’s things, [it’s] a better idea.” (Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Delhi, 1983).

“Now this Nahbi itself, or we can call it the solar plexus, or we can say the navel chakra, gives us, as soon as the Kundalini rises, she awakens this. I don’t have to tell you anything – you just become. I don’t have to say that you don’t take drugs – you just don’t take it!

Overnight I have seen people have given up drugs. Overnight [they have given up] alcoholism, overnight everything! And they enjoy their virtues, that’s the best part of it. Some people think ‘Oh then what is the fun.’ What is this that you take something in the pub and next day you have a hangover? Here you take something and next day you’re much better off. It never comes down. It never gives you a reaction. It’s not artificial, it’s not intoxicating, it is from your nerves, it’s bubbling out. So this is the center which is very important in us because most of us have a problem with this center. And here we have a capacity, by this center, that we enjoy our generosity.

[…] The aesthetics of matter are that you can give it to others, suggesting your love. I think that’s the only thing matter can do and in a very special way you can express that love. For example somebody likes a particular thing and you go all the way to get it and give that small thing, very small thing to the person – and the joy, not out of the money that you have spent, but the feelings you have expressed, of knowing what that person would love and this kind of a depth develops within you. Such a lovable, beautiful society you enter into, and you don’t need anything because everybody is looking after your needs.”

Chapter 7. Void
The Swadhishthan chakra moves in a clockwise circular motion around the Nabhi thereby creating the Void – a large circular area around the navel that encompasses the whole abdomen. The Void owes its name to the lack of nervous terminations in the abdominal region, and its spiritual significance is that of the “ocean of illusions” that we have to cross in life to find the truth.

The Void is governed by the guru principle, or the principle of mastery within us. It is said that the guru is the boat that takes us across the ocean of illusions of worldly existence. The guru is there to guide us but cannot force our evolution – the desire has to come from us. However, the guru also needs to be an authentic master, which means that at the minimum he or she needs to be a realized soul. 

Unfortunately, in these modern times, many impostors are taking advantage of the seekers who are genuinely trying to find the truth. Anybody who may have come from a disreputable place can don a saffron robe, set up shop (often in a Western country) and call themselves a guru. Such false masters are interested in power and money, and often destroy the lives of their disciples and their chances of ascent. They all become ultimately exposed through their own greed and bad deeds, but there are a few questions one can ask in order to test the authenticity of a guru or spiritual group:

Is money charged at any time, whether at the opening program or at follow-ups? None of the great masters, prophets and divine incarnations charged any money for their compassionate teachings. After all, the Divine does not understand money, only love and compassion. Truth cannot be bought, sold, or organized into a business.
Do they talk about Self realization at a minimum? If this is not even mentioned, if all they talk about are mumbo-jumbo mixtures taken from various religions and spiritual currents, you may be better off steering clear from it. 
What does one achieve from this spiritual practice? If certain spiritual powers are gained, are those really one’s own, or do they only manifest in the presence of or in conjunction with the “guru”? Or is there a vague promise that one day one could belong to an “elite” circle of initiates (possibly by opening the purse a bit more)?
What is the lifestyle of the guru and their disciples – are they genuinely selfless and compassionate? Do people become knowledgeable after following that practice, or subdued cabbages or recluses? In Self realization one becomes a master, not a slave.
When the Kundalini rises, it restores the path of the central channel of energy through the Void area that is interrupted before Self realization. This passing of the Kundalini through the Void signifies the crossing of the ocean of illusions, when we become our own guru.

The main quality of the left side of the Void is that of being our own master: we can eat anything, or we may not eat at all; we can sleep anywhere, or we may not sleep at all. We are not dominated by anything, nor enslaved by any habits. We cannot become a guru if we are not our own masters first. In a deeper sense, after Self realization we also become our own guide, since we know through the pure knowledge of the left Swadhishthan what is lacking in us and we can face it and correct it. After the Kundalini is awakened and well established through regular meditation, we don’t need a guru to tell us every day what chakra to meditate on or what we need to cleanse in our subtle system – we have this knowledge ourselves hence we become in fact our own guide.

On the right side of the Void, the guru principle helps us surrender to the Divine by recognizing it as our supreme guru or teacher. We cannot become a guru if we are not obedient to our ultimate guru who is the divine power. Once the qualities of the left and right sides of the Void are established, we can also help others in their spiritual evolution.

I remember a deeply beautiful story about Mahatma Gandhi, where a mother brought her son to him, and told him that her son was eating too much sugar, and asked him to tell her son to stop doing it. Mahatma Gandhi remained silent, and the woman left with her child. A week later, the mother came back with her child and repeated her request to Gandhi to ask her son to stop eating too much sugar. Again, Mahatma Gandhi was silent. Finally, after another week, the lady came back with her child, and this time Mahatma Gandhi asked the boy to stop eating too much sugar, and the boy listened to him. Many weeks later, the woman came alone to see Gandhi, and told him that her son had stopped eating too much sugar and that she was very grateful. Then she asked Gandhi why he had not told her son about eating too much sugar during the first two weeks when she had visited him. Mahatma Gandhi replied “because at that time, I too was eating too much sugar.”

What impressed me about this story was not only the fact that the Mahatma showed that you cannot influence someone on something you have not mastered yourself first, but also the fact that he actually reduced his sugar intake for two weeks just to get to the point of self-mastery where this small self-sacrifice made him effective in talking to the child. It’s not how you try to say it, but it’s what is within you when you say it that will influence how you actually say it and the outcome of you saying it.

The various correspondences for the Void are the same as for the Nabhi chakra, except for the corresponding area on the hand which is the circle surrounding the center of the palm. The main element of the Void, like for the Nabhi, is water. Salt also helps to strengthen the guru principle. To cleanse the Void, the best is to try to become one’s own master by leading a disciplined life. However, this should not be taken to an extreme as it may cause an imbalance on the right side: people who are too austere develop a lot of heat in their body and become usually very dry, self-important persons. A true guru is strict with himself or herself and gentle with others, but keeps a sense of balance in everything. Another sign of a guru is that of creativity, of being able to do a lot with very few and simple things at hand. And the greatest act of creativity is helping others become spiritual beings by enabling them to get their Self realization and establish it.

The Void, as much as the Nabhi chakra, is particularly affected by drug abuse and other strong toxins. A study conducted at the University of Vienna15 showed the highly significant effects of Sahaja Meditation on alleviating the effects of drug abuse. 

The study used a retrospective questionnaire in 501 practitioners of Sahaja Meditation of which 268 people had used drugs before starting with the meditative practice. A reduction in drug consumption was observed both for heavy and light drug users. The questionnaire showed that 97% of chronic drug consumers stopped taking drugs, most of them at the beginning of the meditation practice, specifically 42% after the first week of meditation, 32% after the first months. Also, in 93% of the cases studied the duration of abstinence could be assessed to last for several years. 

Shri Mataji on the Void16: “Any time a realized soul will come, he will say the same thing. That’s why there is so much similarity, I should say the unity. In all these people, whether it is Lao Tse, whether it is Mohammed Sahib or whether it is Raja Janaka or Nanaka – they said the same thing. Now where is the difference that comes in? Also we see very clearly, when the truth is your own, the difference comes [in the fact] that these incarnations came for a different type of a job. Like Moses came to establish the Void, as we say, here in the center. […] All these people who were Primordial masters came on this Earth to establish the balance and that’s why whatever they have said, all have said the same thing. […]

So you must understand that – the truth when it comes to a person like that – not only that he knows but he can make others also know. This is what William Blake has said [that people like you] will become prophets and will have powers to make others prophets. So people sometimes say ‘why didn’t it happen earlier?’ No, that was not the time. Now the blossom time has come, so it is happening.”

Chapter 8. Heart
The Heart chakra, like all other centers, has three sides: left, right and center, even though the physical heart is located on the left side. In the left heart resides the Spirit, which is what we truly are: the eternal Self that cannot die or be destroyed. As it is explained in the world’s spiritual traditions, it is only the body and its composing elements like earth, water, etc. that perish, but the Spirit never dies.

However, the fact that we are the pure Spirit or Self is not to be taken as a mental idea but needs to be experienced through the connection to our Self, which happens through Kundalini awakening. To know the Spirit is to be the Spirit. This happens when the other identifications with our ego, conditionings, body, thoughts, emotions, etc. recede.

The Spirit is like a pure light shining in our heart, witnessing all our good and bad actions, unperturbed in its continuous bliss. It is us who are away from it, thinking either of the future (ego) or the past (superego). Once we receive our Self realization, in the silence of meditation, we can feel the presence of the Spirit where all fears, pains and contradictions are absorbed and dissolved.

“The Spirit, which is the reflection of God Almighty, is the source of absolute truth and joy. But this Spirit does not shine in our awareness when it is in the human state. Only after Self realization does our awareness get enlightened by the Spirit. Thus, to find pure love, peace and joy of absolute truth, one has to become the Spirit.”17

The Spirit is the collective being within us, because it is the same reflection of the Divine residing in every being. That is the reason why our heart feels joy every time we do something good to another person, maybe even more than the beneficiary of our good deed. The Spirit is existence itself, beyond thought or emotions. It is the ocean of love, compassion, truth and joy, and it is awareness in its purest form. It is the guiding force which enables life, as well as the manifestation of the qualities of the other centers.

The love of the Spirit is unattached and boundless. It is like a river flowing to everyone equally, without any attachment to a certain person, family or group of people. As Shri Mataji often says, it is similar to the sap in the tree that rises and goes to nourish all the branches and leaves. If it were attached to one leaf, the tree would die and eventually that leaf would die as well. Detached love simply loves, without expecting anything in return. Attachment and possessiveness are in fact the death of love, and are the main enemies of this center.

On the physical level, the left Heart chakra looks after our blood vessels and circulation and its gross manifestation is the thymus gland and the cardiac plexus.

The left Heart also represents our relationship with our biological mother, so any strain on this relationship will affect this chakra. Also, lack of interest in the Spirit and attachment to matter as well as extreme physical exertion can affect this chakra and can ultimately result in a heart attack. The Spirit is extremely innocent and detached. If our attention gets entangled in materialistic pursuits, we go away from the Self and there is no end in trying to satisfy our desires. 

Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi explains that our desires are relative and as such never satiable, as is well known in economics: once a desire is fulfilled, another one arises, and so on. However, there is a pure desire within us which when satisfied gives us complete contentment and the fulfillment of all desires, and that is the aspiration to become one with our Spirit. The Kundalini is the power of that pure desire within us, and Self realization is the goal that we consciously or unconsciously seek. Shri Mataji says: “You cannot know the meaning of your life until you are connected to the power that created you.”

The right Heart corresponds to our relationship with our father. It is the center of responsibility, humility and it marks the boundaries of our good conduct toward others. 

The right Heart chakra is responsible with the lungs and breathing, and heat rising from the liver can affect it. Right-sided (aggressive, overactive, agitated) people are prone to developing problems of the right heart such as asthma.

The center Heart chakra, located behind the sternum bone, represents in us the qualities of confidence, security, fearlessness, as well as faith in the divine power and in ourselves. This chakra develops in childhood and is fully formed by the age of twelve. The feeling of motherly protection is embodied by this center. This is the center that produces antibodies and sends them to fight all attacks on our being, both physical and subtle. Fear and self-doubt reduce the power of this chakra and thus affect our immune system. On the other hand, confident and fearless people have a strong immune system and a very positive outlook on life.

Fear is anti-divine, because by being afraid we are doubting or denying the ability of the all-pervading divine power to protect us and save us from all circumstances. After Self realization we realize that there is a higher force that completely protects us, guides us and nourishes us at all moments, that we are now one with it, and that there is nothing left to fear anymore. Absolute faith is one of the most important qualities of a human being and has been exalted in many inspiring books and poems.

The element corresponding to the Heart chakra is air. Besides the subtle techniques that are beyond the scope of this book, there are a few things we can mention for cleansing this chakra, such as taking calm and deep breaths. Regular exercise (but not excessive) will, as it is well known, help the heart and blood circulation. Excessive exercise will on the contrary strain the heart chakra and can result as mentioned above in a heart attack.

As the center Heart is responsible for our feeling of security, clearing this chakra through meditation reduces fear and anxiety and increases our self-confidence. A study conducted at the University of Vienna found a significant beneficial effect of Sahaja Meditation on state (short term) anxiety and trait (long term) anxiety in healthy adults18.

A group of 37 adults was taught Sahaja Meditation for 8 weeks and compared to a group of 32 adults who received no intervention and a group of 32 adults who had to listen to music of Mozart. The group who practiced meditation showed a significant reduction in their levels of state and of trait anxiety compared to both controls and to the group that listened to Mozart: Sahaja Meditation decreased trait anxiety by 15%, and state anxiety by 40%.

Also, given the effects of Sahaja Mediation on reducing sympathetic activity and respiratory rates, several studies have investigated whether meditation would have an effect on respiratory diseases.

A study conducted at the Natural Therapies Unit of the Royal Hospital for women in Sydney, Australia, showed a significant beneficial effect of Sahaja Yoga on asthma patients who were resistant to steroids19.

47 patients with severe asthma were randomly allocated to two groups: one group received Sahaja Yoga treatment (21 patients), the other group received general relaxation treatment (26 patients), both conducted over 4 months and involving a 2 hour session. The Sahaja Yoga group showed a significant reduction in the severity of asthma as measured in airway-hyper-responsiveness in response to chemical challenge (an objective indicator of the severity of asthma) compared to the control group who received relaxation.

Similar findings were observed in a previous study in India which used the same meditation technique20.

Shri Mataji on the Heart chakra21: “Now we have the center which we call here as the Heart center, it controls both the left and right heart. So we have a left and right heart in Sahaja Yoga! As you know that this sternum bone creates the antibodies for you and these antibodies fight your diseases, so when this center goes out, this is the center which sends all the messages to these antibodies. Now this is the center of a mother. When your motherhood is challenged you develop breast cancer. Supposing a man is a flirt and his wife is worried… she might get breast cancer, because her motherhood is challenged and her sense of security is very disturbed – as a result of that she gets this problem.

Also if you are too much of a thinker and you think too much and you are very, what we call right-sided, the futuristic plans; I mean people plan for ten years, they plan even their deaths. What dress they’re going to wear and where they’re going to be buried – up to that point! All this futuristic planning creates such tremendous heat in the body because the liver, which is supposed to absorb all the heat, is neglected by this center. As a result that heat travels up [to the right heart] and you develop asthma. Now we had, yesterday at least, five, six people who came with asthma.

Asthma is absolutely curable, but do you know this is the center of a husband, of the father? You should not be shocked because later on you will find it.

Now if you are a bad husband you can get asthma, or if your wife is a shrew you might get asthma, or if you are a very bad father, you might get asthma, or if your father is not kind to you, you might get asthma. If you have not forgiven your father, you might get asthma, now can you believe it? Just forgiving your father, you can get out of your asthma permanently. Sahaja Yoga has cured [the] asthma of so many people. Believe it or not, it works.

It looks so funny but our relationships, our parents… I know they are wrong, they’re obstinate, they are headstrong, they may be drunkards, whatever they are. But even if you leave them – because so many people leave [their] parents – still, forgive them and forget, otherwise you carry the problems with you. 

The left heart is the place of the mother. Now if your mother has been hard with you, if you have had very bad experiences, you will have problems of the left heart. Center heart is very important where your sense of security should be established. You will be surprised [that] in the disease called AIDS it is the center heart which is [blocked]. 

[…] So you have to have that wisdom which comes to you through Sahaja Yoga. […] You have to become the Spirit and you have to see in the light of the Spirit what is right and what is wrong.”

Chapter 9. Vishuddhi
The fifth chakra, Vishuddhi, is placed at the base of the throat and corresponds to the cervical plexus and the thyroid gland. It is the chakra of divine diplomacy and detachment. It allows us to be in a witness state, watching and enjoying everything without getting involved, attached or troubled. It is also the chakra of collectivity, which allows us to express our joy through our collective relationships.

The Vishuddhi is the center of sweet and benevolent communication through our words, facial expressions and gestures. Aggressing or dominating others through our words will block the right side of the chakra, while feeling dominated or using sarcastic humor will block its left side. The left Vishuddhi also gets caught up if we don’t have self-respect or if we feel guilty. 

Guilt is actually a myth that allows us to carry an invisible burden without facing it. The best way to get rid of it is to introspect and face our mistakes, learn from them and stop repeating them. This is how all the problems and negativity we still carry with us can be identified and eradicated. Of course, meditation is important in helping with this process. Feeling guilty instead of facing and correcting our shortcomings can be very detrimental to our evolution as well as our health. If the left Vishuddhi is caught, it can freeze the whole left side by which the heart and the organs of the left side become lethargic. Ultimately, one can develop angina or spondylitis.

The left Vishuddhi also manifests the brother-sister relationship which is extremely pure and can be very powerful. There is something unique in the relationship between a brother and a sister, a concern, support, and also a directness that allows them to correct each other in a loving but straightforward way whenever they are concerned about their sibling. 

In countries with millenary traditions like India, if you are a man then every woman your age who is not your wife is like a sister to you, and similarly if you are a woman than all men except for your husband are your brothers. This maintains a very strong purity of relationships between men and women. Unfortunately in the West it is quite the other way around: many men think of all the women who are not their biological sisters as potential girlfriends, and similarly for women. This attitude ruins the purity of the relationships, and causes a blockage on the left Vishuddhi for both men and women who have such views.

I remember as a young boy having a close friend who was a girl, while not feeling in the least attracted to her. I happened to talk about this friendship with a family friend who was a grown-up, married woman, and she said that pure friendship between a boy and a girl, or a man and a woman, without any attraction between them, is not possible. I did not say anything because she was my elder and my mother’s friend, but in my mind I revolted as I wanted to say to her “you are so wrong.”

During all subsequent years I continued to prove her assertion wrong, but it was only after starting to practice Sahaja and seeing the pure, flower-like relationships between men and women in the Sahaja groups, that I began to see not just a select few, but all women except my wife as my sisters. It was such a joy, relief and an epiphany for me to realize that I have so many sisters in so many parts of the world, on whom I can rely and who can rely on me at any time, with whom I can communicate freely within the auspicious boundaries of the pure brother-sister relationship.

In India, the brother-sister relationship is celebrated by the sister tying a string called rakhi (pronounced rah-key) around the brother’s wrist, after which there are sweets and small presents exchanged. A sister can thus make anyone their brother, and the strength of the relationship thus formed, represented by the string, is on many occasions taken quite seriously. It is said that Alexander the Great, in his long march of world conquest, was stopped in India by the king of a relatively small army who took him prisoner. Alexander had several wives, and one of them who was Indian sent a rakhi tie to the king who had imprisoned Alexander. The king tied the rakhi and then wanted to find out who was his new sister. Upon realizing that it was the wife of Alexander, he immediately exclaimed “Oh my God! What have I done? I have imprisoned my own brother-in-law!” and commanded his immediate release. Alexander the Great was so impressed with this unexplainable behavior that he decided to turn his armies around and leave India, because this was a people beyond his understanding.

Another quality enabled by the Vishuddhi chakra is the witness state, which is a state in which we do not react: we are undisturbed by external events or our own thoughts, but we are able to see everything clearly in the state of thoughtless awareness. This doesn’t mean that we are indifferent – on the contrary, in this state we become at the same time compassionate and dynamic, acting in harmony with the divine power.

The witness state is strongly related to the quality of detachment, which is another attribute of the Vishuddhi. An example of how witnessing and being detached helps us be dynamic and effective in our actions, is a fireman taking a child out of a house in flames. If it were for the father of the child to do it, even if the father was a fireman himself, he would be far from being detached. He would be crazed to get his child out and would probably not take the best decisions, and might even get both himself and the child burnt by the fire. A fireman who is not related to the child would however be detached, and because of that would be able to assess things clearly and act in a most precise and effective way to save the child. 

Attachments can cloud our judgment, while detachment and witnessing clear it and make us so much more effective and “present” in anything we do.

A study published in the International Journal of Neuroscience was the first to demonstrate that long-term practitioners of Sahaja Meditation develop a positive sense of detachment as they showed reduced emotional reactivity and increased resilience to stressful events22.

Twenty-five long-term meditators compared to controls showed reduced psychological, physiological and electrophysiological reactivity to stressful stimuli, providing for the first time neurophysiological data to support the hypothesis that Sahaja Meditation leads to emotional balance and greater emotional resilience to stressful life events.

The meditators were compared to controls in their response to a stressful video-clip that was shown to them. On a psychological scale, the meditators compared to the controls showed reduced subjective ratings of negative emotions (among metrics measured were disgust, sadness, anger, fear) elicited by the movie. They also showed reduced levels of an autonomic indicator of stress (skin potential levels). At the brain level they showed reduced gamma activity over the frontal brain regions compared to the control group (gamma wave activity over frontal regions is reflective of increased focused arousal in relation to the emotional involvement).

These findings provide pioneering neurophysiological evidence for the claim that long-term Sahaja Meditation effects lead to greater emotional stability, reduced emotional reactivity and greater resilience to stressful stimuli.

On the physical level, the Vishuddhi looks after our throat, neck, eyes, ears and hearing, nose, mouth, face, and also shoulders, arms and hands. If we go against the principle of balanced and gentle communication of the Vishuddhi, ultimately it can reflect on the physical level in a variety of ways: the mouth may become dry, the tongue may become constricted or rolled back, we may get frequent colds, runny nose, sore throat and aches in our shoulders or arms.

The element associated with this chakra is the Ether, which is the subtle medium of communication and the carrier of the subtle, vital energy. 

Singing is a great way to open the Vishuddhi by expressing the beauty of the Spirit in our heart. But singing has to be done in an auspicious way, respecting the Divinity and spirituality that reside in us, and avoiding frivolous or vulgar songs. Classical music, especially Eastern classical music such as Indian ragas, are the best for opening the Vishuddhi since they are in tune with the divine vibrations. 

The Vishuddhi is also the starting point of our ego and superego, which will be discussed in the next chapter. Thus the Vishuddhi chakra represents the basis of our consciousness, the inner voice we can sometimes hear guiding us to choose the good and avoid the bad things for our Spirit. This center contains a sub-chakra called Hamsa, located between the eyebrows, which gives us the sense of discrimination.

Our inner sense of discrimination can sometimes easily become befooled by the bombardment of modern media and advertisements. A salient example is the madness of fashions put out by entrepreneurs, which change periodically to the whims of a few individuals. This makes the followers of a fashion look all the same and lose their individuality while emptying their pockets at the same time. Moreover, some of the clothes promoted are ugly, indecent or unhealthy, exposing parts of the body that should be covered. The only purpose served by such fashions is to pamper the ego of those gullible enough to fall in their trap. The presence of an over-developed ego is often the sign of lacking wisdom. On the other hand, traditional countries have found after hundreds and thousands of years of experimenting, styles of clothing that best suit the men and women living in their given climate. Dressing appropriately and in a dignified way is a sign of self-esteem and good discretion that are congenial to the Vishuddhi.

One instance in which I was able to use the quality of diplomacy with immediate and effective results took place in Chicago in the mid nineties. Among my circle of friends at the time were a Bulgarian man and a Russian woman who spent some time every week driving together. The man could not drive due to a medical condition, and the woman used to always help him when he had to go to a Sahaja program. However, the lady was a bit “left-sided” and had a pretty poor attention, which constantly seemed to drive the man (a right-sided person) nuts. The scenes were hilarious at times when seen from outside, but for the two of them the mutual frustration seemed to reach a breaking point. It was a pity to see this happening at the surface, because deep down I could feel that there was a brother-sister relationship between them.

One evening while we were enjoying some food at someone’s house, I took the Russian woman aside and told her how much the Bulgarian man appreciated her, and how despite his manifest frustration, he had such a deep sense of gratitude for her and profound respect and admiration for her qualities as his sister. I then went into the other room, pulled the Bulgarian man aside, and told him similar stories about how much the Russian woman appreciated him in reality, despite the apparent friction, and viewed him as a brother. During each conversation, I could see the surprise and then change in their attitude clearly on their faces. I saw them later on that evening talking and enjoying each other’s company, smiling and joking like a true brother and sister, and after that day the tension between them was gone. It only took a bit of creativity and diplomacy to dissolve the frustration that these people had developed with each other.

The variety of the human races creates beauty, which would have become boredom if everyone looked the same. The same variety is the hallmark of the beauty expressed in the nature. The color of our skin has nothing to do with our personality, character, goodness or spirituality. In India, there is a festival called Holi where people mix colors and throw them at each other in a playful way, to celebrate the variety of races that exist in that country.

The Vishuddhi thus stands for the universality of human culture, transcending all barriers of race, religion, background or social status, like a multicolored cloth through which passes the same common thread of the Spirit.

Between the heart chakra and the Vishuddhi there are two centers called Shri Lalita (on the left) and Shri Chakra (on the right). They control our arms and hands and give them strength, and generally help balance the left and right side. When these centers become imbalanced our arms and hands become weak.

Butter and ghee (clarified butter) are very beneficial for the Vishuddhi. Also massaging the neck and gargling with warm water and salt or honey can help cleanse this center. But as is the case with all the centers, the most important way of keeping it open and in balance is by respecting its qualities, in this case by using kind, auspicious communication and avoiding using strong, insulting or ridiculing language or raising our voice. Our voice should ideally be melodious, as sweet as a river of honey. If the right heart is the inner aspect of our respect towards others, the Vishuddhi is the outer expression of that respect and benevolence.

After Self realization, the Vishuddhi becomes enlightened like all the other centers, and all its qualities can be fully manifested. We get a sense of connection with the entire world, and we start feeling that we are part and parcel of the whole, as if we are a cell in the great universal organism.

Shri Mataji on the Vishuddhi chakra23: “So then we come to this center which we call as the Vishuddhi. These sixteen petals look after the cervical plexus. Now this is a very, very important center and this is the center for communication. For example, when you talk, you communicate. Through your hands, you shake hands, you touch somebody and you can communicate, even if you cannot talk, with your hands you can communicate also.

When we think we are very responsible this center goes out. […] Actually, the all-pervading power – which has created us, created this universe, and has brought us to this level of human beings – is doing everything, but we think we are responsible, that we have to do it. But once you become a Sahaja Yogi you just do it but you don’t think that you are doing it. You just say ‘it’s happening’, and what a beautiful feeling it is. Then you don’t have blood pressures, you don’t have headaches, you don’t have tensions – no. Because we are not doing it, it’s just done and you find it’s all done.”

Chapter 10. Agnya
The sixth center, Agnya chakra, is located in the center of the head at the place where the nerves of the optical chiasm meet. It is also the place where the left and right sides of our subtle system cross, making it a very tight passage for the Kundalini to cross and reach its destination on the top of our head in the Sahasrara (seventh center).


Figure 10.1

The left and right channels cross at the Agya chakra

Both ego and superego start developing since childhood and the pressure they start putting on the top of the head calcifies over time the soft fontanel bone. Thus we become like an egg, with our own individual consciousness, separate from other human beings. When we receive our Self realization, this “shell” is pierced by the Kundalini – we can say metaphorically that from an egg we then become a bird, and our awareness can now take flight into a higher dimension. That is why a realized soul is called “dwi-jaha” in India, which means “twice born,” but also means “bird.” And perhaps this is the reason why in the Christian tradition people crack eggs by knocking them against each other. 

The left hemisphere of the brain corresponds to the ego, a subtle energetic “balloon” that gives us the idea that we are separate from (or better than) the rest of the world. The ego thus makes us identify with it and its whimsical nature, instead of identifying ourselves with the Spirit. Ultimately, we can become self-centered and little concerned with the needs of others. If we grow our ego too much, we can push its boundaries to the point where it connects to the collective supraconscious, an area corresponding to extremely ambitious and dominating personalities like Hitler and Napoleon.

The ego grows from our reactions to outside events or to our own thoughts, as well as from planning and having a futuristic attitude. Modern civilization seems to be based a lot on this principle of reaction: “he said this so I will say that,” “I saw this so I will do that,” and so on. People who react a lot can in old age become very forgetful, senile, and can develop illnesses such as Alzheimer’s disease. By contrast, during meditation we are in a witness state which reduces reactions and the likelihood of mental illness later in life. Also, the best way to keep our ego down is through love. Pure love and compassion are the killer of ego, as they put us in touch with the source of joy, the Spirit that resides in our heart.

The superego corresponds to the right hemisphere of the brain and is the place where all our past, memories, habits and conditionings are stored. Ideas that we form over time, whether they correspond to reality or not, become part of the superego and are sometimes hard to dislodge even if they are faced by our own experience which shows that truth is different from what we believe. It is sometimes hard to give up such conditionings but, if we are honest in our quest, we always let truth prevail over our acquired ideas.

Conditionings may take many forms that are acquired by upbringing, education and so on. Examples include racism, nationalism, religious fundamentalism or fanaticism, dogmatism, and other such “isms.” Sometimes conditionings come in the form of groups we feel attracted to – as human beings we can have the tendency to “club” together for whatever reason. At other times, conditionings come from fear, which affects the left side. Conditionings can also take the form of fashions or sophistication: we may feel that something is not right if the fork is on the wrong side of the table, if the food was not cooked in a certain way, or if something has a color that is different from what our “code” tells us it should be. The superego, like the ego, can ultimately destroy our spontaneity and joy. If we grow our superego too much by become slaves of our habits, lust, greed and all base desires, our superego can connect with the collective subconscious which corresponds to sly, self-indulgent personalities – a dark pit that is very hard to get out of.

Conditionings can manifest in many ways, for example some can come from the religious ideas we have received and developed since our childhood, based on the environment we grew up in, the books we read, the people we came in contact with. For example, religious conditionings can subtly go against the Spirit by making us think that our religion is the best and everyone else is wrong, by becoming ritualistic, or by developing certain concepts that may not reflect reality. Before Self realization these are unfortunately easy pitfalls to fall into, since we cannot yet perceive reality on our central nervous system. However, once the Kundalini is awakened and our consciousness becomes enlightened through sustained meditation, we can see our ego and superego, we can separate ourselves from them and stick to reality.

It took me some time hard work, honesty and courage to weed out some of the conditionings I had accumulated. However, comparing what I had to lose (my own relative opinions, however strong) against what I had to gain (true knowledge based not on ideas but on direct experience), my decision was taken without hesitation. This is not always easy and requires a strong desire to find the truth, and sincerity towards ourselves. One day I was talking to a coworker who had received her Self realization at my workplace and was meditating every day, while also being a very religious person. We were discussing some specific ideas which had become very much ingrained in my coworker’s mind. When we got to the subject of whether, when confronted to a direct and clear experience that contradicted these ideas, she would give them up or ignore the truth, my coworker admitted that she would never give up her ideas even if they proved false by their experience. 

I then realized that in order to grow spiritually, we need a certain dose of courage and sincerity in our quest. Only this can enable us to confront and get past our own ingrained conditionings and ego, and proceed towards reality, based on our own undeniable experience, whatever that truth may turn out to be. Also, if we fail to recognize the truth when it is presented to us, if we deny our own experiences or doubt what we clearly felt, the chance of those experiences and validations may never cross our path again.

Self realization is a living process that works within us gradually to enlighten our awareness, like the sprouting of a seed into a big tree. If we follow our wisdom and honesty, our Kundalini energy will always show us the path, in a gentle way and without putting any pressure, to the truth we are seeking. It is up to us to decide to walk on this path.

The Agnya chakra also equips us with the most powerful weapon we have, which is forgiveness. Through forgiveness we can cleanse the Agnya chakra and rise above our mind into the realm of the Sahasrara. 

Forgiveness is such a tremendous power, which we are often not even aware of. It was the power to solve problems within us (by healing us and taking us out from the clutches of thoughts that poison our minds) and outside ourselves (by healing others and their relationships with us). 

My wife Barbara once had to suffer from one of her bosses who was mistreating her. As she knew from her practice of Sahaja Meditation that forgiveness is a power that solves things by itself, and not forgiving means simply torturing yourself, she tried hard to forgive despite all the difficult circumstances. At one point, she just let go of it and forgave that person completely. A few weeks later, she found out that the man had been moved to a far-off department, demoted, and he found himself in a truly miserable situation. All this happened after the simple act of forgiving, and nobody, not even Barbara, could have designed a better punishment!

I have been in several situations where by forgiving someone when there were issues between us, they told me later on that I had “grown several notches” in their eyes, and we became much closer friends afterwards. And I have been in other situations where had I not forgiven and had I reacted to something that looked wrong to me, I would have unknowingly made a grave mistake from which my relationship with that person would have probably never recovered, and it would have been my fault entirely. At other times, reacting got me into trouble which took quite some time to repair. And so many times I thanked my stars for not reacting, for just not saying anything but simply waiting, only to see that time has a way to resolve problems, which sometimes proved to be imaginary (but would have become real had I reacted to them).

One of the dangers of becoming too conditioned by allowing our superego to dominate our behavior is that our subconscious can fissure and allow negative entities to enter, which can cause a host of psychosomatic diseases that are largely considered incurable. One such illness is epilepsy. Sahaja Meditation once again proved its effectiveness as a series of studies have showed significant reductions (of up to 86%) of the number of seizures in patients with epilepsy after 6 months of treatment with Sahaja Meditation compared to another type of meditation as a control group.

Sahaja Meditation elicited a reduction in seizures of 65% after 3 months and of 86% after 6 months. The other type of (control) meditation or non-treatment led to no significant changes over 6 months. In addition, there was also a reduction of stress-related physiological indicators only in those patients treated with Sahaja Meditation. Additional results included an increase in skin resistance indicating decreased sympathetic activity (more relaxation), a reduction in blood lactate indicating less anxiety, and a reduction in vanillil mandelic acid (VMA) indicating reduced stress levels24.

Shri Mataji provides several explanations about this center, notably why it is not a good idea to put one’s attention on the Agnya chakra during meditation (the attention should be instead kept on the top of the head)25: “Today we are going to understand the center of Agnya, Agnya chakra, which is placed on the crossing of the optic chiasm. The nerves that supply the eyes go backwards in the opposite direction and, wherever they cross, this subtle center is situated.

It has a continuous connection with the other center through the medulla oblongata. This center has got two petals and this subtle center on one side acts through the eyes and at the back of the head where you have some protrusion. This is the physical side of this center. 

Now the people who talk of the third eye – this is the third eye. So that we have two eyes with which we see, and there is a third eye which is a subtler eye through which we can see. If you see this eye that means you are away from it. For example, if you can see your eyes, that means you are seeing your reflection, not the reality. If you see anything that means you are looking at it. So those people who say they see an eye, for example people who take LSD and all such things, they start seeing another eye. They just see this eye and they think their third eye has opened. Actually you are very much away from the eye, that is why you can see it. You go to a supra-conscious level on the right side and on the left side to the subconscious level, you can see the eye. 

But in Sahaja Yoga you have to see ‘through’ that eye. Like a window, you can look at the window, but if you see through the window you cannot look at the window. So this illusion that people have that ‘we can see third eye and that is why our Kundalini is awakened’ – they are sadly mistaken.

This is a very narrow passage, through which attention cannot pass normally, it is an impossible thing. It is a narrow passage, where the ego and superego fit on to each other and cross each other. And there is no gap in between for the Kundalini to pass through. So this third eye is to be penetrated through, or we have to enter into the third eye, through Kundalini awakening. 

But it is such a closed passage which is the door to the limbic area, which is the kingdom of God, that anybody who tries to push their attention through this closed door, either goes to the left or to the right. And this is the beginning of the trouble of the people when they don’t understand that whatever is unknown is not God, is not divine. So, when they move on the right side, they go to the supra-conscious area. And they start seeing hallucinations.”

Shri Mataji further describes the witness state and its connection to the Agnya chakra26: “Now on this center [Agnya] when we come, as I told you, your thinking is controlled by you. You can control. If you want, you can think or you don’t think, but in that silence you feel your peace, if there’s too much of crowds, too much of problems suddenly you become the witness. You start seeing everything, seeing the problem what it is. Unless and until you can see the problem you cannot solve it. Because you are in the problem you just get upset, but if you are out of the problem you can see it and that’s what happens to you when you become thoughtlessly aware.”

Chapter 11. Sahasrara
The Sahasrara is the seventh and last chakra, the destination of the evolution of our awareness. This center is located on top of the head in the fontanel bone region that was soft in our childhood, which corresponds to the limbic area of the brain. The Sahasrara is the integration of all the chakras. It is represented as a lotus with a thousand petals, and the remarkable fact is that in its cross-section, the human brain shows precisely one thousand nerves in the limbic area, placed like rays radiating from the center of the fontanel area.


Figure 11.1

View of the limbic area (Sahasrara chakra) from above

It is through this point in the center of the fontanel bone, at the very top of the head, that the Kundalini pierces and opens our Sahasrara when it rises through our central channel. This event is felt as a cool breeze that flows gently at the top of the head and in the center of the palms. Some people can feel this coolness in the fontanel area even without placing their hand above their head, some can feel it in the soles of their feet, and some can feel it in the body (especially along the spine, where the Kundalini rises).

Several EEG studies conducted by Russian scientists between 2001 and 200327 compared the brain activation of long-term Sahaja Meditation practitioners to short-term practitioners and found that during the meditation, long-term meditators showed reduced thought activity and more feelings of happiness based on the subject’s own ratings. These groundbreaking studies indicated that the alpha as well as the more rare theta waves – associated with the feeling of happiness or positive emotions – increase as mental activity (thinking) decreases, demonstrating the mental benefits of the state of thoughtless awareness (mental silence) that Sahaja Meditation enables. 

Another study published in the International Journal of Neuroscience compared 25 Sahaja meditators to a group of 25 control subjects on a range of trait personality measures28. The long-term Sahaja meditators scored significantly lower in personality features of anxiety, neuroticism, psychoticism, and depression and scored higher in emotion recognition and expression, suggesting that long-term Sahaja Meditation practice leads to higher psycho-emotional stability and better emotional skills.

The Sahasrara allows us to perceive reality as it is, beyond the relative concepts of our mind. That is why in meditation we put our attention to this chakra, without concentrating or putting an effort (which can cause strain on the Agnya chakra), but in a relaxed way. After Self realization, the Sahasrara becomes the apex of our Yoga, of our connection with the Divine.

The times we are living in are very special, as they correspond to the Sahasrara chakra. Shri Mataji calls them the Blossom Times, in which humanity can take its rebirth and return to the lost paradise through Self realization. On the 5thof May in 1970, Shri Mataji cleared the path to en-masse Self realization by opening the collective Sahasrara. She described this historical event:

“It is the greatest event of all the spiritual happenings of the universe… Without this happening, there could not have been the possibility of giving en-masse Realization to people. […]

As soon as the Sahasrara was opened, the whole atmosphere was filled with tremendous Chaitanya [vibrations], and there was tremendous light in the sky, and the whole thing came on this earth, as if a torrential rain or a waterfall, with such tremendous force […].

The happening was so tremendous and so unexpected, that I was stunned and got totally silent at the grandeur. I saw the primordial Kundalini rising like a big furnace, and the furnace was very silent but a burning appearance it had, as if you heat up a metal, and it has many colors.

In the same way, the Kundalini showed up as a furnace like a tunnel, as you see these plants you have for coal burning, that create electricity: and it stretched like a telescope and came out one after another, shoot! shoot! shoot! just like that. I started seeing all that and got lost in the joy. It was like an artist seeing his own creation, and I felt the joy of great fulfillment.

After coming out of this beautiful experience, I looked around and saw human beings so blind and I became absolutely silent, and desired that I should get the cups to fill the nectar.” 

Sahaja Yoga was born. Every human being desiring to attain the connection to their Spirit and with the divine power could now receive their Kundalini awakening, their Self realization.

When the Kundalini energy is established in the Sahasrara, the beauty and bliss of the Spirit can be felt in the silence of meditation. We transcend the limitations of our ego and conditionings. This is the spiritual realm described in many ancient scriptures as the Kingdom of Heavens, Kiyamah, Nirvana, Moksha or Satori. As we meditate with our attention in the Sahasrara, our brain gradually becomes enlightened and is guided by our Spirit rather than by the whims of our ego and superego. Shri Mataji describes this elevated state of consciousness:

“The limited capacity of the brain becomes unlimited in its capacity to realize God. If you are the sun and the sunlight, if you are the moon and the moonlight, where is duality? Only when there is separation there is duality, and because of that separation you feel attachment… a distance between you and yours; that’s why you get attached to it. Everything is we, who is the other? When the brain has lost its identity, the so-called limited brain becomes the unlimited Spirit.”

Atheism, doubt in God, and anti-God activities go against the principle of Sahasrara and may close this chakra or put pressure on it. This may be felt as tingling or a sensation of heaviness at the top of the head. The best way to keep our Sahasrara open is to meditate with our attention on this center, which is the destination of our spiritual journey, and also to keep our ego and superego from developing. It is the thoughts we have and the pressure from these two entities of ego and superego that closes the Sahasrara and cuts our connection with the Divine.

As human awareness is united to the Divine when the Kundalini emerges through the Sahasrara, we become vehicles of the all-pervading power and begin to experience a subtler level of communication – collective consciousness. This form of awareness allows us to perceive ourselves and others directly on our central nervous system, rather than merely through external perceptions limited by the five senses. This is the vibratory awareness that allows us to feel in our palms or even in our body, where the problem is, within us or outside of us, and clear it with the power of the Kundalini.

We become like a barometer, feeling the subtle state of our being and of our environment or anything we put our attention to, and we automatically neutralize the negativity we come in contact with. We also learn to appreciate the real depth and beauty of another person through the vibrations we feel, rather than based on superficial appearances. This is the true knowledge of the absolute, perceived through the Sahasrara after our Self realization.

We all have a powerful radar up there, in the Sahasrara, that can guide us in our life towards the good and help us avoid the evil. Inside us there is a built-in divine computer ready to function with a precision that is superior to our limited thought, just as all living processes work spontaneously without the involvement of the mind. It is just a matter of connecting it to the mains through our Self realization. 

Shri Mataji on the Sahasrara chakra29:

“Last but not least, is the center of limbic area which is very important. Now I do not know if it has been discovered or not, but will be very soon discovered, that very strong things like crack [cocaine] and [everything that has] got sulphuric acid in it – that doesn’t go anywhere in the body but just rushes into [the] limbic area. Now this limbic area is a hollow place which has got all [the] cells which are very sensitive to joy, happiness, but they become numb, so numb that [even] ordinary music you cannot hear. 

Somebody has to scream at you, has to shout at you, has to jump on it, otherwise you cannot enjoy.

Then it has to be worse and worse and worse and worse. I don’t know now with crack, later they might develop something more poisonous, because it has to excite this limbic area which is such an important thing. But as soon as the Kundalini enters into that area, limbic area, she soothes it and it opens and then the Kundalini emerges out of your fontanel bone area and gets connected to the all-pervading power.

Then you start feeling the cool breeze in your hand. You can feel it all over. Some people, who in the beginning felt the cool breeze, could not believe it so they closed doors, everything, and then they sat down to see. Still they were feeling it! But it works, works in the sense that you get empowered. You become peaceful, you become the witness. You become empowered that you can give realization to others. You can raise their Kundalini like this and you can establish that connection. You can do it and this is what is your right to have it, this is what will give you meaning. Otherwise, so far, whatever we have been doing is very frustrating.”

On another occasion, Shri Mataji describes the unique characteristics of the Sahasrara chakra : “Today is a very great day, I must say, to celebrate Sahasrara […]. It’s a very unique thing that has happened that your Sahasraras were opened out.

There were some very few people in this whole world – there were some Sufis, there were some saints, some other people also in China I know, but very few. Very few got their Sahasrara opened. So whatever they said or was written was never understood by the people. They actually tortured them, they crucified them and did all kinds of horrible things because they couldn’t bear somebody getting this realization.

So it’s a very great day because collectively this Sahasrara has been opened. Every one of you has got it. Also all over the world you have many people who have got their Sahasraras open. […] Some have grown very much after getting their realizations, very much. They have understood Sahaja Yoga very well and they have developed their depth and their consciousness is really a great awareness of oneness with the Divine.

To be one with the Divine is the greatest blessing for human beings. […] Like that in Sahaja Yoga so many people have come whose Sahasrara was completely opened and they felt their depth. First you must feel your depth. If you don’t feel your depth, and you are not one with your personality which is so deep, then you cannot enjoy the Self realization.

First of all you should understand yourself. If you don’t understand yourself, how can you understand other people? You cannot. So first this Sahasrara should be opened out fully. Fully means complete oneness with the Divine. That is not difficult. Only you have to meditate a little bit and then it will work out. It has worked out in many people. I am very happy to see and meet such people in Sahaja Yoga, who have achieved such a lot of collectivity and also the awareness of a realized soul. 

Ego is the greatest hurdle for your ascent. You see, that ego is at a place where you have to just cross to go to Sahasrara, and to break Sahasrara is very easy otherwise. But if there is ego, you are already lost in that ego.

So against all this one has to understand that ‘watch yourself’. Am I egoistical? Ego is very limited. It makes you limited and you don’t see the purpose of your life. […] But if you have […] an ego-less temperament then you are very effective – the whole power works.”

Chapter 12. The Three Channels of Energy
The left, right and central channels of energy correspond to the three basic tendencies that drive our existence. The left channel corresponds to our power of desire, emotions, feelings, and our past. Our desires are essential for action, since without their impetus we would have nothing to act upon.

The left channel is the feminine side of the lunar energy, called as Yin in the Chinese tradition. It starts from the Mooladhara chakra and runs up the left side of the body, crossing the Agnya chakra to the right side of the head where its termination is the superego.

The greatest quality of the left side is to give us joy, which is the steady condition of the Spirit. No matter what we may go through, this joy of the Spirit is ever present, though we may not always feel it. This feeling is evident in little children who quickly recover from anything that disturbs them and resume their state of joy, perhaps because their greater sensitivity to their Spirit. Love and devotion are also associated with the left side because they come from the heart.

The heart, in which the Spirit resides, is the main organ of the left side. However, the emotions of the heart need to be kept in proper balance, in tune with the Spirit. People who go too much towards the left side become lethargic, over-emotional, and depressed, finding no purpose for their life. They tend to oversleep and can also become self-indulgent and cunning, led by their desires and attractions. They have a tendency to dwell in their past and daydream about their worries and miseries. 

Even though they may suffer from insecurity or an inferiority complex, left-sided people may aggress others in a subtle way by complaining all the time or, if the superego is very bloated, by gossiping, backstabbing and scheming against other people. On the physical level the left side can trigger a host of illnesses, for example depression, heart problems and cancer. All the problems of the left side can be overcome if the imbalance in this channel is corrected.

A study conducted at the University of Exeter, UK, showed that Sahaja Yoga has a beneficial therapeutic effect on the symptoms of patients with depression and anxiety30.

Twenty-four patients with depression and anxiety were divided into three groups: a group receiving Sahaja Meditation over 6 weeks, a group receiving the conventional behavioural treatment for depression i.e. CBT (Cognitive Behavioural Therapy), and a control group who received no treatment. 

The group treated with Sahaja Meditation compared to the non-treated group showed a statistically significant reduction in the symptoms of anxiety, depression and an improvement in general mental health. At a trend level the Sahaja Meditation group also showed improvements compared to the group treated with CBT. 

The study shows that Sahaja meditation has a visible effect on improving the symptoms of depression and anxiety, which was significantly more pronounced than the conventional behavioral treatment for the disorder.

*

The right channel of energy corresponds to action, to physical and mental activity. It corresponds to the future and is the hot side of solar energy within us, called as Yang by the Chinese. It starts from the Swadhishthan chakra and runs up the right side of the body, crossing the Agnya chakra to the left side of the brain where its termination is the ego.

People who are on the right side can become overactive, restless, aggressive, and even violent. They typically have a hot liver that makes their thoughts race in their head and causes them to have a dry, quick-tempered personality. They may suffer from insomnia since even though they keep themselves extremely busy during the day, they cannot still themselves at night. 

Right-sided people tend to develop ego due to the heat that rises through their right channel up to the Agnya chakra. Under the influence and control of their ego, they can justify any of their actions with a firm belief that they are “necessary” and “logical.” Such people think no end of themselves and consider that they own the world, having a right to put others down. Hitler and Napoleon were extreme examples of such right-sided behavior. Going too much to the right side can also cause many diseases, a few examples of which are paralysis, heart disorders and Alzheimer’s disease.

It is hard to maintain balance in today’s fast paced environment, created by materialism and greed that manifest in the cutthroat competition environment of modern corporate culture. However, through Sahaja Meditation techniques, all imbalances in the left and right sides can be corrected in a natural way, without any side effects.

The proper action results when one is detached from the fruits of one’s activities and realizes that we are not the doer – rather, it is the divine power that is doing everything while we just go with its flow.

*

The central channel is the path of our spiritual evolution. It is through this channel that the Kundalini rises at the time of our Self realization. The power of this channel sustains our spiritual ascent and keeps us from going to the extremes of the left and right sides. It corresponds to the path of knowledge – Gyana Yoga.

While the left and right channels of energy correspond to the left and right sides of our sympathetic nervous system, the central channel corresponds to the parasympathetic nervous system. The right side can be thought of as our accelerator, and the left side is like our break. While these two channels can put tension in our being by pulling the chakras to one side or another, the central channel relaxes us by activating the parasympathetic.

People who are in the center are concerned about their physical, mental and emotional balance and are generally interested in their spiritual growth. However, even these noble tendencies can fall into ritualism and fanaticism before the Kundalini is awakened, which is the only way we can get out of our limited “shell” of the ego and superego, where we can become dominated by the tendencies corresponding to the three channels of energy.

After Self realization, we transcend these tendencies and gradually become a very spontaneous person, who is detached and not bothered by small things, but at the same time extremely loving and compassionate towards other people. We become a free personality as we are guided by the divine power in our decisions. Freedom is now manifested not as abandonment to our desires, but as the ultimate freedom of the Spirit where we are not enslaved or dominated by anything, and are free from the bonds of our own ego and superego which are the cause of all our unhappiness. This ultimate freedom is the blessing of collective consciousness, expressing itself as peace and joy.

Chapter 13. Miracles of the Divine Power
Once we become connected to the all-pervading divine power through Self realization and continue to establish this initial connection through regular meditation, the notion of miracle starts to gradually lose its meaning as we see this power at work in our daily life. We realize that this divine power does everything in the universe and its ability to act goes beyond our limited understanding.

The all-pervading power organizes, acts, and above all, it loves us. We have never known that we are loved by this divine power, but after Self realization we can feel its loving protection looking after us at every step. 

I was once involved in an accident where the car that my wife and I were in went off the highway and onto the grassy area between the inbound and outbound lanes. It flipped over and slid on its roof for several seconds that felt like an eternity – at 70 miles an hour. Then it flipped again and landed on its four wheels. A few cars pulled over and people came to us to ask us if we needed an ambulance. To their stupefaction, my wife and I thanked them but declined, got out of the car and walked away. Our brand new car was totaled, but we didn’t have a single scratch. I had only a tiny bump on my head, the kind that hurts only when you press on it. Years later, remembering this event I could only relate it to the movie “Unbreakable” by M. Night Shyamalan. I wonder if Mr. Shyamalan is aware that in a way, people similar to his movie character do exist (and in larger numbers than he would presume).

The all-pervading power even protects us from physical aggression, from attacks by other people. I was once in a Sahaja camp in India together with thousands of Sahaja Yogis from around the world. These are occasions for tremendous spiritual growth, very powerful vibrations, and at the same time lots of joyous moments spent in the collectivity of Yogis. However, that particular year a quite unusual problem arose when our blissful camp was infiltrated by a madman posing as a Sahaja Yogi who was looking to cause nothing but trouble. Everyone could see that he was not acting as a Sahaja Yogi but decided to leave him alone. 

He came to the door of one of the barracks where twenty-some Sahaja Yogi men, including myself, had our sleeping quarters. He had a big, thick stick in his hand, and was cursing at everyone from just outside the door of the barrack. I was meditating at the time, but it was so surreal to hear such words in the pure atmosphere of the camp, that I turned around to see what was going on. He spotted me, asked me what was my name, and asked me to come outside. I remembered for a split second the all-pervading power and got up. Even though the madman was brandishing his big stick, it never even crossed my mind that he was really getting ready to hit me with it.

I was fearlessly walking towards the door and came right on the threshold, in the door frame. One more step and I would have been outside where he would have hit me so fast I could not have even seen the blow, causing serious injury (I later on learned that he was a martial arts expert – these people are fast). But not as fast as the divine power. During that split second when I found myself in the frame of the door, a very tall and well-built Russian Sahaja Yogi who was sharing the same barrack, bolted like a flash of lightning past me through the door, landed on the crazy martial artist who was preoccupied with me, wrestled the stick out of his hands and put him on the run. As I learned on that day, nothing, absolutely nothing, is faster, or stronger, or wiser, or more capable than the divine power and its miraculous ways of solving problems.

For those interested to find out what happened to the madman, he was able to escape from the wrath of the Russian Yogi only to fall into the arms of a strong English Yogi who meant business. He locked the madman in an iron grip, they wrestled a little bit and came to the edge of an 8-foot tall drop-off. They fell off and the madman landed with his back on some big rocks, while the English Yogi (weighing over 200 pounds) fell on top of him. Who arranged for that to happen? (it could obviously had been the other way around, with the madman on top). I will let you guess the answer. 

No one knows if the crazy fellow broke any bones in that fall, but one thing is for sure: after that, he was quiet and soft like a baby. The English Yogi was literally leading him by the hand. The madman was dispatched in a taxi with a Sahaja Yogi who put him on a plane back to his native country. Our Sahaja camp resumed its usual activities and state of peace, joy and pure vibrations. 

The whole universe, weather, wind and atmosphere moves under the direction of the all-pervading power. All you have to do is become one with it, through Self realization. Once, as I was giving a Sahaja public program on the Purdue University campus in Indiana, the tornado warning siren got activated. I had never heard one before and since I didn’t know what it was, I ignored it and went on. In the meantime, the people in the room started to get a bit restless and some even got up and started to make it for the door, looking for shelter. As I came to understand what this was about, I just felt that I didn’t want to interrupt the session, and calmly said “why should we let this tornado interrupt our class?” I was not going anywhere, so I invited everyone to sit back down. 

Less than thirty seconds later, the siren stopped and we continued our class undisturbed. The next day I found out what had really happened from a friend of mine, corroborating the sequence of events based on when the siren went off and subsequently stopped. Apparently, two tornadoes had been sighted close to the campus that afternoon. One had touched down two miles away from the campus, and another was forming right above us and was preparing to touch down. Then, unexpectedly, the first tornado lifted off the ground and went away, while the second one dissolved in the sky before touching down. We had once more enjoyed the full protection of the power that we had become connected to.

The next day I received an email from a Sahaja Yogi friend of mine in New Jersey. Among other things he asked: “what about those tornadoes?” I feigned ignorance in my reply: “which tornadoes?” He then emailed me back saying that the night we had the public program there had been a very intense tornado activity throughout the state of Indiana. What had also made news was the fact that on that particular night the number of emergency calls associated with tornadoes was 33% less than the average, and none of the experts could find any logical explanation for this.

One may think that such occurrences are pure coincidences – when they happen the first time, the second time, maybe even the tenth time. But as they keep on happening, as if because the divine power wants to convince us that we are indeed connected to it, after a while we get used to such happenings that become part of our daily life. Interestingly enough, sometimes things get resolved in a different way from what we had envisioned, but they always get solved in the best possible way. For example, we may desire and put our attention on moving to a different place, but it may not work out. Later we can realize that it was better to stay where we were, and thank the divine power for creating “obstacles” to our move. As the Rolling Stones song says, you don’t always get what you want, but you get what you need.

One of the ladies who were in the class that evening told me later on that using vibrations she was able to help a relative of hers give up smoking in three months. She also had a powerful experience that showed her that even though she was relatively new to Sahaja, she was well connected to the all-pervading power and could use it with incredible results, even in a play. Here’s what happened.

One day I was walking on the Purdue campus in between my classes and noticed a strange weather pattern. It would rain for 10-15 minutes, then it would stop for half an hour and the sun would come out, then again rain vigorously for a short time, then again