SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 1990-04-22
TALK: Nirmala Vidya Amruta
LOCATION/EVENT: in-which-distinguished-sahaja-yogi-doctors-present
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:25:08
CHARS: 74060
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
Post navigation
Previous post:
The Divine Cool Breeze (North American Newsletter), November 1988, Vol. 2, No. 10
Next post:
The Divine Cool Breeze (North American), February 1989, Vol. 3, No. 2
The Divine Cool Breeze (North American Newsletter), January 1989, Vol. 3, No. 1
Books online | All Books
Sunday, January 1st, 1989
DCB
Magazine
Online, PDF
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English
Google Drive
The Divine Cool Breeze
May 1990
Volume 4, No.4
International Newsletter

| | Aum Shri Nirmala Devi, Namoh Namah | |

The Divine Cool Breeze
Major Sahaja Yoga World Centers
11, Apt. 4
EASTER PUJA TALK SYNOPSIS
Eastbourne, England
April 22, 1990
SAHASRARA PUJA SYNOPSIS
Rome, Italy
May 6, 1990
SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI’S TOUR OF SOUTH INDIA
HYDERABAD PUJA TALK SYNOPSIS
February 25, 1990
SHRI KRISHNA PUJA TALK SYNOPSIS
Madras, February 9, 1990
Easter Puja Eastbourne, England
April 20-22, 1990
Sahasrara Day 1990
Rome Public Programmes
Public Program in Perugia, May 9, 1990
The Divine Mother Blesses Russia, The Agnya Chakra
Report of Follow-Up Programs, Early 1990
Department of Curotology and Physiotherapy, Sochi
Education System, Sochi
Albica
Kiev
Leningrad
Moscow
Sahaja Yoga School In Dharamsala
Shri Mataji’s Itinerary
“Now you are responsible not only for yourself, but for your ashrams, for your cities, for your countries and for the whole world. Now assume your powers.”

— Shri Mataji, Fiuggi, Italy, 21st Sahasrara Day, May 6, 1990

Major Sahaja Yoga World Centers
Algeria
Mr. Mohommed Said Ait Chaalal
27 Avenue Pasteur
Alger, Algeria

Australia
Mr. Steven Taylor
10 Clarence Street
Burwood, Sydney NSW 2134
Australia
Telephone: 02 – 747 – 4835

Austria
Mr. Markus Hager
Josef Melichar-Gasse 20
1210 Wien, Austria
Telephone: 0222 – 381559

Belgium
Patricia Deene
11, Fazanten Park
9800 Deinze
Belgium
Telephone: 91-86-34-57

Brazil
Mr. Duilio Cartocci
c/o Nirmala House
Alameda das Cajazeiras 35
Caminho das Arvores
40000 Salvador BA, Brasil
Telephone: 71-2300941

Canada
Mr. Vern Wills
P.O. Box 27006
1395 Marine Drive
West Vancouver, B.C. V7T2X8
Canada
Telephone: 604 – 921 – 9946

Colombia
Camilo Holecek
Carrera 2B, 66-23
Bogotá, Colombia
Telephone: 57-1-248-9444

Finland
Mr. Petri Hakkarainen
Mäkelankatu 10.A.18
00510 Helsinki 51, Finland

France
Mr. Patrick Lantoin
5 Rue des Etendards
59700 Marcq-en-Baroeul
France

La Maison du Sahaja Yoga
9 allée du Rocher
93340 Le Raincy, France
Telephone: 1 – 43 – 811612

Greece
Mr. Stamatis Boudouris
Amyklion 22, 15231 Halandri
Athens, Greece
Telephone: 1-72 – 27 – 610

Holland
Mr. Henno DeGraaf
Echtenstein 929
Amsterdam, NL 1103 AA Holland

Hong Kong
P.F. Feenstra
Flat D-39 101, Repulse Bay Road
Hong Kong

India
Mr. Yogi Mahajan
P.O. Box 1901
Koth Rud
Pune 411029
Maharashtra, India

Mr. Rajesh Shah
52A Darshan Apts.
Mt. Pleasant Road
Bombay 400006, India
Telephone: 22 – 822 – 0620

Universal Sahaja Temple
78 Krishna Nagar, Gali No. 3
Safdarjung Enclave
New Delhi, India 110029

Italy
Mr. Guido Lanza
Nirmala House
Piazza Belvedere
Localita Pichini
00012 Guidonia, Italy
Telephone: 774 – 340416

Japan
Maki Tsutsui
7-19-21 Kita Karasuyama
Setagaya-ku
Tokyo 157, Japan

Malaysia
Ng Wooi Boon
7 Jalan SS 22/30
Damansarajaya
Kuala Lumpur

Nepal
Liselotte Wiehart
Old Vienna Inn
Thamal, Kathmandu
Nepal
Telephone / fax: 00977-1-411820

New Zealand
Mr. Brian Bell
P.O. Box 3159
Auckland, New Zealand
Telephone: 09-366-1885

Oman
Dr. Rustom Burjorjee
P.O. Box 32485
Al Khoud College of Medicine
Sultan Qaboof University
Sultanate of Oman

Sierra Leone
Mr. Patrick B. Sheriff
c/o Sierra Rutile Limited
P.O. Box 59, Freetown
Sierra Leone, West Africa
Telephone: 25316 / 23730
Telex: 3259

South Africa
Mr. Siva Govender
69 Munireddy Road
Pietermaritzburg 3201
Natal, South Africa

Spain
Mr. José-Antonio Salgado
Santa Virgilia 16
28033 Madrid, Spain
Telephone: 764 3767

Switzerland
Mr. Mathias Koluzny
Route de la Bellanghre
1261 Givrins, VD
Switzerland
Telephone: 22 692644 or 45

Turkey
Mrs. Carla Mottino
Sumer Korusu
Samidino Sokacil

11, Apt. 4
Tarabya
Istanbul, Turkey

United Kingdom
Dr. David Spiro
7 Albany House, 50 Flask Walk
Hampstead,
London NW31HG England
Telephone: 01 435 2018

Ashram
44 Chelsham Road
London SW4, England
Telephone: 01 622 1634

United States
Mr. Karan V.S. Khurana
6276 Lakewood Street
San Diego, CA 92122 U.S.A.
Telephone: 619 546 – 9379
Fax: 619 566-3180

West Germany
Mr. Phillip Zeiss
Nibelungestrasse 68
8000 Munich 19, W. Germany
Telephone: 89 17 36 37

EASTER PUJA TALK SYNOPSIS
Eastbourne, England
April 22, 1990
During the Easter Puja, H.H. Shri Mataji prepared us for a big jump forward to be taken on the 21st Sahasrara Day. She told us that it is our opportunity to worship the resurrection of Shri Jesus Christ and thank Him for providing us an ideal of dedicated, intense and saintly life. Especially among the western Sahaja Yogis there is a tremendous surrender to Jesus Christ. This surrender, however, has to be enlightened. Even before realization people believe in some higher being. However, their belief is without the connection and becomes a sort of falsehood. They have a mythical, romantic idea that they have a special relationship to God. What is worse, this blind faith often gives people ideas that they have a right over God which they win by their act of belief and that God is obligated to provide for their material well-being. Christ has warned such people, “You will be calling Me Christ, Christ, but I won’t recognize you.” It is only after realization that we get the connection with all the Deities. However, when Sahaja Yogis lack depth, this connection also degenerates to the same level, in a subtle way. Sahaja Yogis then feel that Sahaja Yoga is obliged to provide for their well-being.

Shri Mataji explained that after realization when we get connected with Christ, our attitude should change completely. We have to imbibe the qualities of Christ within ourselves. Christ’s life should inspire us to lead a life “that could be enshrined, that could be called as a reflection of Christ’s life.” Christ felt responsible for the world. He is described as the support of the whole universe in the Devi-Purana. Sahaja Yogis also have to feel responsible for the emancipation of the whole humanity and for the collective ascent of human beings. We have to be alert and be aware of our responsibilities.

Christ was concerned all the time with the benevolence of the world. Christ was knowledge. He knew His goal. He spoke the truth with complete courage, intensity, and dedication. Sahaja Yogis also have to be knowledgeable about Sahaja Yoga and speak about Sahaja Yoga with courage and dedication without being pretentious. The truth has the capacity to express itself through a personality. If we really believe that we are Sahaja Yogis we should be able to speak about Sahaja Yoga in the same way Christ spoke about the truth. If we cannot do it then we are lacking in the intensity which Christ has. Christ valued His work and did not waste His precious time on any frivolity. We also have to value our self-realization, and have intensity and dedication about our work in Sahaja Yoga. We can not waste our attention on useless things.

When we imbibe these qualities of Christ we will enjoy meditation. Shri Mataji explained that a person who cannot enjoy his meditation cannot be a Sahaja Yogi. The first sign of a Sahaja Yogi is that he looks forward to the time when he can meditate. “That is the time you are really in connection with the Divine and you enjoy the most.” If Sahaja Yogis cannot get up for meditation and cannot keep awake, it is because Christ is not awakened in them. If His blessings are there on the Agnya chakra, we enjoy meditation and cannot get out of a meditative mood. To see our connection with the Divine with an awakening within is “Nirananda,” absolute joy. Sahaja Yogis cannot give up this joy for anything. Shri Mataji said this joy is like ambrosia trickling down on the tongue. To enjoy this we have to touch our depth. All Sahaja Yogis have depth, but they have to touch it.

Christ lived a life of complete sacrifice and He had to achieve His resurrection. He was dedicated to His goal; Sahaja Yogis also have to have complete dedication. Moreover, every step we move forward is so joy-giving. Sahaja Yogis also have to sacrifice their laziness. There is a subtle kind of lethargy working out among Sahaja Yogis when they say that they have done their jobs and it is for younger people to do it now. We have a lot of work ahead of us. Shri Mataji said, “You have to work very hard to develop yourselves vertically in balance with your horizontal growth.” … “All the time you have to think that you are a Sahaja Yogi and you have to know what you have to do in Sahaja Yoga and how to achieve it. You should not be satisfied unless and until you have achieved that excellence.” … “Mediocrity has no place in Sahaja Yoga. Only through excellence you will enjoy. Only through excellence you will really become Sahaja Yogis.”

Christ knew that He was an instrument. He was the one who had to open the Agnya Chakra. He had to achieve that through His resurrection and He did it. Had Agnya Chakra not opened, it would never have been possible to open the Sahasrara. Sahaja Yogis also have to realize that they are the instruments for Param Chaitanya Shakti to work out. The argument that ‘Param Chaitanya will do everything and look after us’ is absolutely absurd. If this were so, there was no need to create human beings. Sahaja Yogis should now count their deeds instead of counting their blessings. They have to reach their depth. “Unless and until you become deep, it (Param Chaitanya) cannot trigger. It is helpless. It is only through you it is going to work out. …So Param Chaitanya has its own style. It can only work if you people want to work it out. It is the energy and you are the instrument.” Shri Mataji said we have to be dedicated, intense and deep instruments of Sahaja Yoga and see “…how best you can reach people, how many people you can give realization, how many people you are going to help to improve their health, their mental condition, and then how much you are going to talk about Sahaja Yoga.” Shri Mataji said that this is how Sahaja Yoga is going to work out the collective ascent of human beings.

SAHASRARA PUJA SYNOPSIS
Rome, Italy
May 6, 1990
“All these years I have been waiting for this 21st Sahasrara Day. Now a new change has to come and you can see the announcement (big roar of thunder). We have so far been dealing with collective consciousness, chakras, nadis but perhaps we do not know how many powers are developed in past 21 years within yourself…

The all-pervading power knows everything and the whole nature works for your benefit and progress and at the right time. Now be confident that you have powers. This is the new change that is going to come within your own understanding. So far you know that you could feel the vibrations, cure the people, feel the Param Chaitanya, but you do not know what dynamic forces are working in you and this new change is going to come. With this new change, you have to assume a new character – ANNOUNCEMENT (big roar of thunder). So far I told you not to talk about Sahaja Yoga openly, but now the time has come to start talking, announcing, telling about it to everyone; otherwise, the world would say that we never knew about it. So far we have kept Sahaja Yoga at a low ebb because I wanted, first of all, you to develop into really very beautiful Sahaja Yogis, so that from your lifestyle, behavior, understanding and thoughts, people would realize that these people are very unique – a very different type of people. You have to understand that all these powers are bubbling in you – but you are hiding it for some reasons.

Now those days are gone where Mother has to cure your headache, look after your family, wife and children… is all finished now.

Now you are responsible, not only for yourself but for your ashrams, cities, countries and for the whole world.

Now you are all in the “Royal Court.” Take up your responsibility. ASSUME WHAT YOU ARE. KNOW YOUR POWERS – WHAT YOU CAN DO. Now the days are gone when you have to count your blessings and miracles. Now YOU HAVE TO COUNT YOUR POWERS, AND HOW I CAN USE THEM?

This is the new era we are starting from today. This is the day I was waiting for all of you to realize that you are not Sahaja Yogis for only your selfish ends nor for your families, communities, countries BUT FOR THE WHOLE WORLD! EXPAND YOUR SELF.

You must have that vision before you that I have put many a times before you people that you have to emancipate the humanity. Now don’t have diffidence. This work is not going to be done by special people because they suffer from ego. This is going to be done by the people who don’t have that ego of great success or of achievements or riches. Christ said that a camel can pass through an eye of a needle but a rich man can not enter in the kingdom of God because their ego is bigger than an elephant.

As we are entering in new awareness, let us not worry about our negative conditionings. There is only one confession, that ‘I am a Sahaja Yogi and now after 21st Sahasrara, I am a Maha Yogi.’

Now we have to openly say and tell these fundamentalists, ‘You don’t know about the truth, or the power that is working. You are stupid people running after something that is a mirage and all of you will end up in hell.’

You may tell people that the new announcement has to come to say that running after falsehood is not going to take you to God. We believe in the power of Love, and not in the power of hatred. We believe that everyone is capable of finding the truth and getting to the heaven of that paradise which is promised to us, the kingdom of God.

These nonsensical problems of my family, my wife, my children, my house, my property, my money — all these “Mys” should be finished first, because you belong to the whole world like a noble king belongs to his kingdom.

Now you are absolutely free and the source of your joy is your Spirit. You are detached from everything. In that detachment you are going to nourish everyone. Detachment comes through thoughtless awareness. When you look at anyone, get to your state of thoughtless awareness. Immediately you will feel detached and you will know the solution to the whole problem. THE GREATEST POWER YOU HAVE IS IN YOUR BRAIN, THAT YOU ARE KNOWLEDGEABLE. Just you have to get into thoughtless awareness and the whole library of knowledge can open to you. Also in every field you have advanced so much, but these are very mundane things which may give us little pleasures here and there but the main thing is how many people we give realization to, how much we can announce about Sahaja Yoga.

Sahaja Yoga is not “by the way.” Sahaja Yoga is committment and complete involvement; otherwise you are really useless for Sahaja Yoga. It’s better to have few people who are committed than to have thousands who are just useless. So let us see what you have decided for yourself and what you have decided for Sahaja Yoga. If you have decided to opt for Sahaja Yoga, then just know that this is the main thing which you have to do. THE WHOLE ATTENTION SHOULD BE ON SAHAJA YOGA. WHAT IS HAPPENING IN SAHAJA YOGA? WHERE ARE WE? WHERE ARE WE GOING? WHERE IS MOTHER? WHAT PART SHE IS IN? WHAT IS SHE DOING? If you put your attention to it, your negativity will absolutely disappear. So now you are Maha Yogis, we have to make it a MAHA YOGA. Unless and until that level is achieved by you, then you should think that you are still backdated and I don’t know in the turning of the wheel, how many will be left.

Now don’t doubt about yourself and just go full ahead with all the mariadas of Sahaja Yoga. So the MARIADAS have to be there. Except that the moral mariadas (boundaries of conduct) have to be there, and also the behavioral mariadas. There are not many mariadas in Sahaja Yoga. BUT THE MAIN MARIADA IS THAT YOU SHOULD BE VERY MORAL PEOPLE, and also you should be, in appearance, in behavior, such a person that you do not become obnoxious.

Today we have people here from all over the world and you go and tell this message to all the rest of the people whom I have not met that, “MOTHER HAS ALREADY ANNOUNCED, THROUGH THE VISHNUMAYA ALSO, THAT YOU ALL HAVE BECOME NOW MAHA YOGIS AND TRY TO EXPRESS THAT, MANIFEST THAT. WITH FULL CONFIDENCE IN YOURSELF AND WITH THIS POWER OF LOVE, I AM SURE WE’LL ALL WIN OVER.”

SHRI MATAJI NIRMALA DEVI’S TOUR OF SOUTH INDIA
The Adi Shakti blessed Hyderabad, Madras, Bangalore, and Ahmedabad. The Param Chaitanya organised everything so beautifully as waves of joy and love opened the hearts of thousands of seekers of diverse cultures and conditionings. After the programmes, She spent several hours correcting each individual problem. Many people were cured of serious and sometimes fatal diseases.

In Hyderabad, we suddenly came upon a prominent statue of a great Shalivahana king who was an ancestor of Shri Mataji. Shri Mataji revealed that the Shalivahanas also reigned in this region for a long time. In Madras, She expressed that Sahaja Yoga was the fulfillment of their bhakti and now the time had come for thousands of seekers to get their realisation. A spontaneous puja to Maheshasura Mardini took place in Bangalore as we all prayed for his destruction. She was pleased with Gujrat, the land of Shri Krishna, where people had such open hearts – they got their realisation so easily. Shri Mataji poured so much love and said many wonderful things which are reported in this issue of the Divine Cool Breeze.

HYDERABAD PUJA TALK SYNOPSIS
February 25, 1990
[Translated from Hindi to English]

I feel so joyful to see all of you. I did not even imagine that in Hyderabad so many people have become Sahaja Yogis. Mixing up of different types of people is the characteristic of Hyderabad. Now we have to approach Sahaja Yoga in a new way. It is important to know that Sahaja Yoga is Truth and we are firmly rooted in it. We have to, therefore, discard the untrue; otherwise, we cannot attain purity. As a matter of fact, untruth is an illusion and we should decide to get out of it. With pure desire for this, our awakened Kundalini puts us in a state where we can discern what is truth and what is untruth and we start longing to attain only the Truth. Giving up all our misconceptions we have to take to Truth.

Some people wish to attain material wealth, some desire to achieve power and there are some others who are in search of God Almighty. Those who want to know the Parama will be the first to come to Sahaja Yoga. After getting established in Sahaja Yoga one is, at times, pained to see the slow pace of Sahaja spreading. But we should understand that a living thing develops slowly; Sahaja Yoga is a living process; we cannot force it on anyone. We can’t give false certificates and we cannot say it for certain that everyone will get realization; for a number of reasons, many people do not get realized.

After realization, when one is connected with the Param Chaitanya, one comes to know that the Param Chaitanya does everything for us; we get detached and become ‘Akarmi’. Nothing worries us. On coming to Sahaja Yoga, due to short-sightedness, in the beginning one considers oneself the doer. Slowly, as one gets experienced, one understands that man does nothing. Param Chaitanya does everything. Everything gets done smoothly. Sometimes, if something goes against our desires, even then we should not think that God has not helped us. In fact, we can neither think nor do more than God; so we have to accept that Param Chaitanya has done the appropriate thing and what is coming up is very beautiful.

There are two aspects about which a Sahaja Yogi has to be very careful. Firstly, through individual meditation we should know our faults, the state of our instrument, whether we are right-sided or left-sided. By putting our attention on the Photograph we can know all this. Then in meditation we should clear all the negativity. In Sahaja Yoga the meditation system is very easy. After clearing ourselves we should get into collectivity. Opening of the heart is essential for this. A narrow-minded person can never be collective. We should not put our attention on the faults of others for by doing so these shortcomings grab us. We should take note of the qualities and inherent beauty of others. We should correct their faults with the power of Divine love. Love is Truth and Truth is Love.

One who uses the power of love ascends very high. With open hearts you have to see people with love. This is how you develop individually and collectively. We should beware of a person who is not collective. Listening to others talk about the faults of others is wrong in Sahaja Yoga. We should observe how softly we can speak and how much power of forgiveness we possess. We should regard all Sahaja Yogis as our relatives.

The second aspect of Sahaja Yoga is the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga and its spreading. We should know which place on the hand or foot indicates the catches of which chakra and which catch could cause which disease and how it can be cured. Ladies, being Shaktis, must attain this knowledge. With the help of this knowledge, ladies will be able to understand Sahaja children and their behavioural patterns.

Spreading of Sahaja Yoga is another significant thing. As without cross-ventilation the room can not be airy, in the same way if you do not pass on the experience of Sahaja to others, do not help them, do not give them self-realization, do not spread Sahaja Yoga, then you, yourself, cannot progress. There are some Sahaja Yogis who keep dreaming all the time that the heaven of Sahaja Yoga will dawn on the whole globe. Such Sahaja Yogis always remain in a state of bliss. A great responsibility has fallen on our shoulders, the responsibility of building up a pure-hearted society in which we can place our faith and remain established in that faith.

SHRI KRISHNA PUJA TALK SYNOPSIS
Madras, February 9, 1990
You are the people chosen by God to do His work. First and foremost is to work for Him, then He works for you. He looks after you. All your personal, social and other problems can be worked out. Those who can leave things to God are best able to resolve their problems. It is the power of Param Chaitanya that nourishes and guides us and organises everything. When you are not expecting something to happen, it just works.

In some people Sahaja Yoga takes time to grow. So have patience and full confidence in yourself. When we are bound in the eternal love of God, why should we worry about anything? The first thing is to believe in ourselves and to have a clean heart and a sincere love for the Divine. The Divine loves you much more. But it loves you in a different way, like a father who loves you. Supposing you make a mistake then he corrects you. In the same way, the Param Chaitanya also corrects you. It clears you in a way that you learn your lesson. We have to remember all the time that we are part and parcel of that great power which we call Param Chaitanya which has now become very active.

Easter Puja Eastbourne, England
April 20-22, 1990
The first puja in the West this year was Easter Puja, which was held a week after Easter day. Between five and six hundred Sahaja Yogis – nearly double what the organisers had expected – converged from all over Europe on The Burlington, a large and extremely comfortable old hotel on the sea front in Eastbourne, a holiday resort in the south of England. We were very warmly welcomed by the UK Sahaja Yogis and particularly those of Brighton, the nearest centre, on the south coast, who despite the overstretched organisation spared no pains to make sure that everyone was comfortable and that our transport and other needs were taken care of. After checking in Friday, the evening was spent relaxing and enjoying each others company.

Saturday morning began with meditation at six o’clock in the ballroom of the hotel, and after breakfast everyone squeezed into the ballroom for a seminar session in which people from different countries filled in a beautiful picture for us of the growth of Sahaja Yoga all over Europe, particularly the Eastern European countries of Czechoslovakia and Roumania. Mention was made of the Austrians’ experience of running a larger number of small programmes in different towns and villages, and how this pattern is being followed in other countries as well. The number of weekly programmes in London, for instance, has grown more than three times in the last year. News was also brought from France and Finland.

The seminar session came to an end after about an hour, and people dispersed to prepare themselves for our Divine Mother’s arrival. We did not have long to wait. Shri Mataji arrived by car from Shudy Camps shortly after half past twelve and, stopping all the time to take flowers and exchange a few words with Her children, she emerged into a hotel lobby crowded with yogis. For quite some time Shri Mataji made Her way up and down the lobby, backwards and forwards a few times, until everyone had had the opportunity to offer flowers and greetings. Shri Mataji seemed very happy to see such a large gathering. After lunch the fine weather, sunny and breezy, encouraged most of us to take a walk along the sea front, and the more intrepid to footsoak in the chilly waters of the English Channel. We were summoned back into the meditation room at half past five to await our Mother’s arrival.

Shri Mataji spoke to us that afternoon about the importance of our vertical ascent. 1990 is a special year, in which a new jump must be taken by everyone. Sahaja Yoga spreads horizontally, and it is we, the Sahaja Yogis, who do the work, Shri Mataji told us. Sahaja Yoga is indeed spreading very fast, but we must not be complacent about ourselves; every individual must rise to keep the vertical depth in proportion with the horizontal spread. Mother reminded us how great and how important each of us is, and what boons each of us has to bestow upon humanity. She insisted that we must not let ourselves go backwards, to regress to our state before realisation; the bird does not want to return to the shell, and we should not wish to go back to all the old attachments and involvement in family, marriage, job, and other mundane things. We came to seek truth and to be one with God. Detachment should be there. Sahaja Yogis, when they are deep, can trigger events, such as the newly-realised delegates at the Soviet yoga conference, who went on to trigger the liberation of Eastern Europe at the end of last year. All of us can have this power, but we must become the instruments through which the Paramchaitanya can act. We all have Mother’s powers at our disposal, but we must be detached like Her, with a great but detached concern for each other and for the world, giving up the limitations which we still choose to carry around with us. Old tendencies of domination, arrogance, and hurting others must also be given up.

After dinner in the evening we were delighted to be joined by our Divine Mother for a musical concert. This began with some bhajans sung by the Desai family, whom we had heard two years previously at Easter Puja in Shudy Camps, and continued with two or three bhajans sung by the westerners. Then as we waited for the main guests of the evening to come, we were entertained by Simon Ayling on violin playing rag Yaman, accompanied by some UK Sahaja Yogis on drums and guitar, and the Desais’ tabla player.

The highlight of the evening was the sitar concert by Nishat Khan, accompanied by his brother Safat Khan on tabla. It was a tremendous virtuoso performance, in which the two blended perfectly together. We have rarely seen Shri Mataji so moved by music; Mother was leaning forward, tapping the rhythm with Her hand, reflecting and anticipating the nuances of the music in Her expression, and gazing intently at the musicians as She fed them with divine love and energy. Nishat Khan said afterwards that he didn’t know what was happening at the time; his fingers just seemed to be doing things by themselves, out of his own control. The music that came was witty and brilliant, breathtaking. Shri Mataji said afterwards that She felt that Shri Saraswati Herself had been playing.

In conversations between Shri Mataji and the leaders, She said that the political problems of the world are essentially fixed, since Mr. Gorbachev has fixed them. All the old East-West tensions are disappearing. But a very serious problem which remains is that of Islamic fanaticism, particularly in the Arab world, where fanatics believe that they can murder or commit any crime in the name of God, and inflict any arbitrary and cruel punishment on people who disagree with them. Another form of fanaticism also drew Shri Mataji’s attention: sporting fanaticism, especially amongst Sahaja Yogis, where football or some other sport becomes a compulsion and a ritual instead of just spontaneous fun and exercise. Shri Mataji also talked about the great opportunities in Eastern Europe. The German Sahaja Yogis had arranged a programme in Wirzburg, near Frankfurt in West Germany, and the seat of an archbishop, very Christian; posters had been put up and everything was ready. But Shri Mataji told them to forget it, saying “Do you want to put your hand in the mouth of the tiger?” Instead, She said, go ahead now with programmes in East Germany, where people have not been spoiled by the “freedom” and materialism of the West and where many excellent seekers are just waiting ready for their realisation. Shri Mataji was also pleased with the Austrian procedure of holding courses on Sahaja Yoga in different towns in the country, and suggested Markus speak at an international seminar to tell in more detail how the Austrians are doing it.

Puja the next day took place in an oak-panelled school hall a couple of miles from the hotel. The Sahaja Yogis who did not wish to walk that distance were shuttled there in a fleet of cars. Soon a brightly-coloured crowd of yogis in kurta-pyjama or saree could be seen on the lawn outside the sports centre, busy shoe-beating and preparing themselves to worship our Divine Mother. At the same time the hall was being decorated with an enormous fabric sun which hung behind Shri Mataji’s throne.

Shri Mataji talked to us about Christ, whom we had come to worship. She commented that Christ knew that He was to be crucified and resurrected, but still He went and did what had to be done, knowing that to be His mission. Christians think that since they believe in Him, God owes it to them to fix up all their problems and shower them with blessings. But what have they done for God? And some Sahaja Yogis share this sort of attitude, thinking that now we have had realisation and believe in Sahaja Yoga and Mother, the Paramchaitanya will take care of everything for us. We may even think we don’t need to meditate, since the Paramchaitanya will meditate for us. Shri Mataji pointed out that this is false. It is as though we supposed electricity were enough to amplify Her voice, whereas an instrument – a microphone – is also needed. Shri Mataji also told us that with Lord Jesus awakened in the Agnya chakra we become very sensitive to light. She Herself cannot sleep if there is the slightest light, particularly artificial light. The deities are watching us to see how we are, and if we cannot get up in the morning for meditation or if we sleep during the meditation they ask themselves why Shri Mataji ever bothered to give us realisation in the first place. If Sahaja Yogis were not necessary for the salvation of the world, Shri Mataji would not have bothered creating them. But Sahaja Yogis are necessary for this great job, and we must act the part that has been given us now that we are on the stage. In the past, Mother said, She would tell people, “Count your blessings.” Now, She said, “Count your deeds!”

The puja was marked by an absence of mantras. Only at the very end, after the aarti, were the three mantras of Sahasrara to be heard. Otherwise the puja was accompanied by music from start to finish, resounding through the hall, including a few new songs such as “Namami” sung to Shri Mataji as Shri Ganesh at the beginning, and the deep “Omkar Swarupa” which followed it.

At the end of the Puja Shri Mataji asked us all to vow that we would now grow vertically. “Shri Mataji, we vow!” came the response from the assembly.

Voyage to Roumania
Through the Grace of Shri Mataji, two French and two Swiss Sahaja Yogis were able to travel by car to Roumania. With us we took a 50 kg photocopy machine and a lot of Sahaja Yoga documentation. Shortly after entering Roumania we travelled through a village called Ganesea (where we nearly ran over a cow!).

We reached Bucharest two days later. We were very warmly received by Anca, the leader of Roumania, and her husband Adrian, both electronic engineers, who gave us the run of their flat. Anca received her realisation two years ago in Geneva during a public programme given by Shri Mataji. She subsequently got married to Adrian, and three months ago had a little girl, Diana, (whom she calls Bhoomidevi). The photocopier offered to the Roumanians by the Swiss collectivity was immediately pressed into service to print posters for two programmes which were to take place on the 11th and 12th of April, in the Hall of Polytechnic Institute of Bucharest University. We might note that there were already about ten Sahaja Yogis in Roumania, to whom Anca and Adrian had given realisation.

During a midnight postering session by some Roumanian Sahaja Yogis they were stopped by a military patrol and told to come to the soldiers’ truck. The yogis were a bit frightened at first, but to their great surprise the officer in charge politely asked them if he could have a poster, and then let them carry on!

Anca had wanted to have the Sahaja Yoga programme mentioned on television; this didn’t work out at first. But just as we were doing a collective shoebeat, particularly for the TV slot, the phone rang, with the TV producer at the other end wanting to interview all of us about Sahaja Yoga. He got his realisation, then brought along a friend who also got his realisation. Subsequently he proposed that we should all be interviewed in Anca’s flat. Next day a team of four technicians from the TV station installed cameras, lights, and recording material in the flat. The TV team and the Sahaja Yogis had both planned out the interview in advance in quite some detail, but as so often happens things went quite differently than foreseen by either, and very spontaneously! In the end we could only once more see that we are just the instruments of the Divine, and that She organizes everything. The whole TV team got realisation. We had to present Sahaja Yoga in three minutes, the camera focusing on the chart of the chakras and of course on Shri Mataji’s photo. From the start we asked the viewers to hold out their hands towards Shri Mataji’s photo. Then Anca, very grave and brilliant before the camera, spoke very spontaneously, announcing that Roumanians had been through an outward revolution, but now Sahaja Yoga is the inner revolution. The vibrations became extremely strong at this moment. After this declaration the presenter had no more questions, as everyone in the room had gone thoughtless! The TV crew went on to film a number of miracle photos which we had brought, notably those of Sahasrara Day in Italy last year, on the boat. “L’Avennement” and all the Sahaja Yoga documentation were also featured.

The two programmes in Bucharest brought between them some 600 people, to our great surprise. We felt a great depth and desire amongst them, and a great culture and open-heartedness and humility. The spontaneity, simplicity, and purity of some of the Roumanians reminded us of the Indians.

Like the Soviet Union, Roumania was rather suddenly opened up to Western influences, and has been invaded by quite a few sects and movements. So-called tantric practices are particularly widespread, and since the word yoga was assimilated to tantrism it was necessary to denounce clearly these immoral practices. Just before the second programme we did a puja to Shri Mataji as Shri Kartikeya and as Shri Ekadesha Rudra, and a collective shoebeat. At the second programme none of the tantrikas came back, except for one or two genuinely interested by Sahaja Yoga. Several hatha yoga teachers received their realisation, and even asked if it would be possible to hold programmes in the centres where they taught. Contacts were also made with the Franco-Roumanian League, a cultural association; both of their organisers, a historian and a sociologist, received realisation.

Two follow-up programmes held before our departure were attended by around 150 people in all, and Anca (now visiting us in Switzerland) reports that around 100 people are still coming regularly. Many very sensible questions were asked by the newcomers, and we were very touched by their expression of love and devotion for Shri Mataji. Many flowers were offered to Shri Mataji’s photograph at the follow-ups, and many were those who expressed the wish to invite Shri Mataji personally to come to Roumania.

For all of this fantastic adventure we felt very strongly the vibrations of our Mother, and particularly during the giving of Self-realisation. We could feel Shri Mataji’s attention and protection very clearly. We were made to feel absolutely at home in Bucharest and on the way back in Vienna, where the ashramites of Gumpi ashram woke up at four o’clock to make us breakfast before we left.

The more we become the instrument of the Divine, the more the Divine blesses us. The more we do for Sahaja Yoga, the more we feel the love and the joy in becoming the spectator of this great drama. After this experience our greatest desire is to carry on with more, as we feel ourselves very much enriched.

Sahasrara Day 1990
Shri Mataji had told us that the great breakthrough would come with the 1990 Sahasrara Day Puja, such a tremendous and historic event. From Shri Mataji’s arrival at Rome Airport on the afternoon of Friday 4th May, the collective happening grew into a mighty crescendo to culminate in this most fantastic of pujas two days later. It’s hard and even a little presumptuous to render what happened in words, but let’s try…

Hundreds of Sahaja Yogis thronged the airport concourse awaiting our Divine Mother. On emerging from the immigration formalities with Mr. Srivastava, Shri Mataji found Herself in a sea of joyful faces and hands holding out flowers, and She walked up and down in the crowd for nearly an hour taking the flowers from each and every one, smiling through the afternoon heat. Finally every offering had been accepted, and Mother took Her place in Her dark blue Lincoln car to be driven to Fiuggi, the spa and resort town in the hills to the southeast of Rome where the Puja was to take place.

The rest of Friday evening was spent travelling to Fiuggi, and settling in and renewing old and far-flung friendships. Quite a few Sahaja Yogis had crossed the Atlantic, particularly from California, to be present with us, and others had come from India; Australia was also represented, along with Romania, for the first time, and many other lands.

A relaxed Saturday morning followed, typically spent strolling around in the sunlight of the town’s beautiful parks. On Saturday afternoon the weather changed abruptly, with a mighty thunderstorm which at one point burst directly over Shri Mataji’s hotel with a thunderclap of such fury that windows rattled and the floor shook, like some sublime fanfare saluting the greatness of the One who blessed us by Her divine presence.

Some time later we could walk out into the cool and fresh air to attend the first event of the weekend, a public medical conference in which distinguished Sahaja Yogi doctors presented Sahaja Yoga in the light of recent discoveries. In particular, Dr. Deepak Chugh from India presented research (which earned him the degree of M.D.) at the Lady Hardinge Medical College in Delhi, on patients (none of whom had had realisation at the start of the experiment) with bronchial asthma and hypertension. The patients with each condition were split into two groups, those being treated by Sahaja Yoga and conventional medicine respectively. The group practising Sahaja Yoga was quickly weaned off the drugs and enjoyed a rapid return to health, the other group making little progress with the conventional treatment. The paper mentioned that those practising Sahaja Yoga said that their lives seemed more meaningful, adding drily that “patients reported a sensation of a cool breeze in the hands and measurements of skin temperature in the palm of the hand showed a significant decrease.” Dr. Brian Wells, a senior psychiatrist and addiction specialist from London, presented his experience of Sahaja diagnosis and treatment. He talked about an experience with an alcoholic patient, which went somewhat as follows:

Dr. Wells: Have you been drinking lately?

Patient: No, Doctor, not at all, not for a while.

Dr. Wells [putting his attention on the patient, and sure in his diagnosis as a sharp pain stabs his liver]: Yes, you have. Either yesterday or today, or earlier.

Patient: Doctor! But how did you know?

Dr. Wells: Mr. Jones, I’m a psychiatrist; I know everything…

[laughter]

After all the doctors had finished speaking and answering questions from the audience, the meeting climaxed with the arrival of our Divine Mother, who gave a short talk stressing the importance of Sahaja Yoga, and then proceeded to give realisation to all the newcomers. Her talk was interrupted, as were those of the doctors, by occasional power failures, but miraculously (and also thanks to the excellent acoustics of the hall) we were all able to hear Shri Mataji’s unamplified voice when this happened. The meeting ended around 9 p.m. and we returned to our hotels for dinner.

The evening’s programme was a musical concert by our friend Nishat Khan, a born-realized sitar player whom we had seen in Eastbourn two-weeks previously and whom Shri Mataji had invited for the occasion. He was accompanied by an Indian gentleman on tabla, a very mild-looking man whose modest, bespectacled appearance gave no clue to the closeness with which he was to follow Nishat Khan and the perfection which he was to give to their playing. Nishat Khan played two ragas in this concert which lasted from around midnight (after the Sahaja Yogis had sung a few bhajans) until dawn at 5:30 a.m. First was the pentatonic Raag Mal Kauns, described by Mr. Srivastava, who did us the honour of joining us for the concert, as “majesty”, and then followed Raag Darbari, the Raga of the King’s Court, at Mr. Srivastava’s request. It was tremendous; as the night grew younger (to borrow Babamama’s phrase) we all of us grew more and more wide-awake, breathlessly following the virtuosity of the players and swaying to every nuance of their wit, joy and spontaneity. The peaceful and exultant face of Nishat Khan rose above the storm of his music, a beautiful sight. Finally, after brief speeches by Shri Mataji and Mr. Srivastava at the end of the concert and remarking that it was a very suitable time, the two musicians played Bhairavi, the early morning Raag. As the dawn light was growing we slowly made our way to bed, still savouring the vibrations.

Puja had been announced for 12:30, and by this time the Sahaja Yogis had made their way through the warm, sunny weather back to the theatre. The Italians had created a whole garden on the stage behind Shri Mataji’s throne, complete with eight arches arranged in a bandhan side by side, and with rock gardens and plants and flowers, the whole being surrounded by a glowing rainbow and with hundreds of fairy lights above to represent the heavens. After some time it was suggested that we should sing some bhajans, and so we started up with “Kundalini, Kundalini” and continued with other songs. We soon could hear the rain beating down on the roof of the hall again, with occasional thunder; Shri Indra still had work to do preparing the way for Shri Mataji to come to join us.

Our Divine Mother arrived in the middle of the rain, and, taking Her place on the stage, began Her talk to us. She had waited many years for this day, She said. A new era is starting from today, in which we must assume our powers and our responsibilities. Now is the time to tell the world about Sahaja Yoga; in the past we did not do so, maybe out of a diffidence, or shyness, or maybe cowardice, but there is no more need of such an attitude. We have come of age, with all our powers; in the past Mother told us “count your blessings”, now, She said, “Count your powers!” We have so many powers, She said, to a clap of thunder which brought applause from Her listeners. Shri Mataji also said that our main problem now is our brain; only if we can get beyond the limited mental understanding can our powers fully manifest.

Some of us might think that because we are not rich and famous we cannot do much for the world’s emancipation. This, Mother pointed out, is not true, as the rich and famous have too much ego, as Christ remarked, for their actions to come to anything; the Work will not be done by them. We should not waste time on confessions of what we might have done in the past; the only confession now is that “I am a Sahaja Yogi; and now, after the 21st Sahasrara Day, a Maha Yogi”. With a positive attitude, all negative forces will go away. Shri Mataji also stressed the importance of our attention being always on Sahaja Yoga; She cited Namdev’s poem, in which he describes the ladies coming back from the well with pitchers of water on their heads; they may be looking around and chatting and laughing with their neighbours, but all their attention is on the pitchers standing steady on their heads.

So, Mother said, we must forge ahead, without doubting ourselves but remaining within the maryadas of Sahaja Yoga. There are not many of these; just live a moral and honest, dharmic life, and appear normal and decent to others outside, while remembering that what really counts is inside. Every day, Shri Mataji told us, we should tell ourselves that we are Maha Yogis; then, with confidence in ourselves, courage, commitment, and through the power of love everything will work out.

As at Easter Puja, there were practically no mantras spoken, music taking their place throughout, with many new and old songs resounding through the beautiful acoustics of the hall. Almost all the presents to Shri Mataji after the Puja were of ivory carvings, the international present being a three and a half foot high statue of the 24-armed Goddess with weapons (and many blessings, as Shri Mataji pointed out), and with three heads, above which were two more heads, the whole crowned by Lord Sadashiva. At the end of the Puja the whole hall, some 1200 or 1300 Sahaja Yogis, was on its feet dancing to “Chalata Musafir.” Afterwards, one of the children went to Shri Mataji to complain that they had not been able to dance for Her, only the grown-ups had; so our Mother invited the children to come and dance before Her, to the strains of “Amhi Bighadalo”.

The festive mood was continued by Jose from Switzerland, who did some imitations of one Bengali Sahaja Yogi who, while very surrendered about Mother’s choice of a wife for him, preferred a Bengali lady, “the best”, and was not keen on Maharashtrian ladies because “they cook with onions”. (The gentleman in question is now happily married with a Swiss lady.) Jose also imitated Dr. Wells’ talk and Guido’s translation of it the previous evening, Xavier from Milan, and the Quali singer from Ganapatipule a few years ago. The evening ended with the Marathi drama which some of the Swiss had so successfully staged in India (causing the local press to report that all the foreigners on the tour spoke fluent Marathi). Finally Mother took Her leave of us around 10 o’clock, and the great day drew slowly to an end.

Rome Public Programmes
Shri Vishnumaya roared and thundered the Adi Shakti’s arrival in Rome, just as She had in Fiugi for Sahasrara Day.

As we arrived in Rome the sunshine broke through the clouds and we noticed all along the roads the large posters announcing Mother’s arrival in Italy. Both programs were at the famous neo-classical style Capranica Theater, situated just in front of the Parliament Building in the center of historic Rome. There were about 175 new people seated among the 250 Sahaja Yogis. The program started with a beautiful introduction explaining the state of well-being created by the raising of the Kundalini and how it benefits the whole society. There was a sense of complete serenity in the theater and one felt a unity among the seekers and the Sahaja Yogis. Dr. Colaneri, a specialist in Preventative Medicine gave a brief lecture on the connection between the subtle system and western medicine. She was discussing the Nabhi chakra, which is the chakra of Italy, when Mother arrived. Mother gave a talk on the evolutionary process from the amoeba stage to beyond the human stage, when truth can be perceived on our chakras.

A question and answer session followed. The first person commented that in the Bhagavad Gita, Shri Krishna had said that if we do not receive our self-realization in this life then we will come back and may succeed in another life. Shri Mataji assured the seeker: “It has come to a state where you must achieve it, and Shri Krishna said this 6,000 years back.” The second questioner stated that she was a strong believer in Jesus Christ, and how could Sahaja Yoga help her? Shri Mataji replied that “Christ is the gate through which you have to pass. But we don’t know much about Christ until we get into Sahaja Yoga. You have to be born again. After Sahaja Yoga, you’ll know Him very well. The next question was: “What do You mean by truth?” Mother answered, “Truth is that you are the Spirit… because Spirit is the Universal Being within us and Spirit is the source of Absolute Truth… All those who become the Spirit say the same thing.

The next questioner asked about the “dangers” inherent in Kundalini awakening, and that he had read that it had to be done by a master. Shri Mataji replied, “It doesn’t have to be done by a master, it has to be done by an enlightened person.” Another seeker told Shri Mataji that he had some experience of enlightenment but was still attached to mundane things, including sex. “Enlightenment has to be clear-cut,” Shri Mataji replied. “Of course, when you get your self-realization you will get the Cool Breeze, but it has to be established. But when you move into it, you’ll be amazed how you get transformed.”

The last questioner said that according to Jesus, the enlightenment has to come from below to the top. Mother agreed with him. He continued, “But according to Tagore, it has to come from the top going down.” Shri Mataji replied, “Yes, that is true. The Grace has to come from the top, but first you have to be connected.” She said that Christ had talked about the Grace, “But He lived only four years, in a way, and what can you do in four years? Four years is not time to work it out, and they crucified Him. I was struggling with seven hippies in London… and even now I’ve been working for 18 years. We are working in 40 countries now, agreed, but how many are there in Rome? How many are there today? So we can now say what Christ couldn’t say. We have to say it more and explain Him.”

As Shri Mataji was saying, “Now we are ready to get our self-realization,” someone jumped up from his seat and called out, “Shri Mataji, I’m very convinced about what You said.” Everyone in the audience was stirred, and Mother called out to him, “God bless you!” Another dramatic moment occurred when Shri Mataji announced within earshot of the Vatican, “Don’t believe people when they tell you that you are a sinner. Don’t feel guilty. Those who tell you that you are sinners are crooks; they must be greater sinners!”

At the end of program, those who had not felt the cool breeze were invited up to the stage. Mother told many of them “You have to forgive,” and even placed a kiss on some of their foreheads. They sat down at Her feet and looked at Her lovingly as She worked on them. Mother stayed late into the night. People were just waiting around, wanting to be with the Adi Shakti as long as possible.

The second program in Rome was attended by more new people and many of those who had come the first night. Shri Mataji had asked the people who had attended the night before to put their questions in writing, so She began the program by asking for questions. The first question asked Shri Mataji to comment on what ‘Christ had said’ that if you eat the meat of an animal you are eating “somebody.” Mother replied, “On the contrary, He said that God has created all the beasts for us.” She continued to say that much of what Christ had said had been misinterpreted, giving the example of Christians justifying the drinking of alcoholic beverages because in the Bible it says that Christ had changed water into wine. Actually, it had been only grape juice. She explained that our interpretations have to be logical: “How can Christ say that you should take alcohol if it takes your awareness?”… “There are myths about every incarnation, but to understand them in the right perspective you must first have your self-realization. Otherwise you cannot understand them. If ordinary people could have understood Christ, they would not have crucified Him.”

The second questioner referred to what Shri Mataji had said the night before, that after self-realization one becomes healthy so why had so many saints suffered from illnesses? Shri Mataji said that perhaps they did not know how to protect themselves. In another part of the question, there was a reference to a saint that Shri Mataji had never heard of, who supposedly had performed many miracles, but had gotten quite ill. Shri Mataji replied that some of the “so-called miracles” were not really miracles. She explained that being able to produce a diamond or ashes from thin air was not a miracle. She said that one has to be very careful about choosing a guru. One should ask, “What have I got out of it? What powers are manifesting? What has added to our awareness? How are we in a higher state? If you just take this point, 99.9% of the gurus will be false.” Shri Mataji said that the greatest miracle is the raising of the kundalini, and that when you get your self-realization you will know Christ. Shri Mataji left this Italian audience to seek the real meaning of Christ. There were many people in the audience who filled out the forms for the follow-up programs.

Public Program in Perugia, May 9, 1990
The public program was held in a beautiful theater in the center of this ancient town in the district of Umbri, the home of many of the Italian saints, such as St. Francis of Assisi. Shri Mataji said it was a City of Peace and that Perugia in Sanskrit means “born of a realized soul.” The crowd of about 150 seekers and about 100 Sahaja Yogis filled this small elegant theater and waited patiently for two hours for Shri Mataji’s arrival. During this time Antonio from Rome compared our ignorance about our subtle system before realization to a situation where monkeys are placed in front of a complex computer system. Gregoire followed by telling about the Environment Day celebrated in New York recently where Sahaja Yogis had set up a display and told people that, “You can’t change the environment until you change yourselves” through self-realization. When Shri Mataji arrived at 8 p.m., She spoke only briefly. She said that it’s only when we become the Spirit that we become connected, “because that is the collective Being within us.” One could feel a silent, gentle joy in the theater as Mother told them that after self-realization they will be “mentally, emotionally, physically and spiritually well, and as this is the town of peace, you will find peace within your heart.” Once again, it was awe-inspiring to watch Mother working so lovingly and patiently on each and every seeker reassuring them that it will work out.

Shri Mataji told the Sahaja Yogis after the program that She was very impressed with this audience and that it was apparent that people from a very traditional culture such as in Italy recognize Shri Mataji so easily.

Mother knew that Her children had been preparing for Her visit for a long time and so on the eve of Her departure for Russia, when there were still many preparations to be made for Her trip, She left Her hotel suite where She had been staying with Mr. C.P. and favored Her children with a visit to Nirmala House. Almost every inch of the house was decorated with every variety of flower and the children — about 25 — were holding bouquets of daisies freshly picked from the garden. When they saw their Mother’s car approaching, they gleefully rushed towards Her and offered the flowers. Mother accepted the bouquets and even a single flower held by some little tots as if She had been handed precious jewels. Shri Mataji smiled and asked the children, “Where did you get those flowers?” She told them to go inside and prepare some songs for Her and that She would be down from Her room shortly to be with them. Everyone sat down — there were some 100 people in the Nirmala House living room — and all of them broke out into very lively bhajans. Within a few minutes Mother graced the living room with Her presence, and Mr. C.P. joined Her.

Shri Mataji looked fresh and radiant. She said She was really pleased with Sahasrara Puja and the success of the public programs in Rome, and particularly in Perugia. Mother began Her talk with how beautiful the Mother Earth is and how we must appreciate Her and our creativity, letting Her work through us. She told us that many people would be coming to the follow-up programs and that we must be very compassionate towards them, remembering how many problems we had when we first came to Sahaja Yoga. Mother cautioned us not to criticize or dominate others. She told us to bring vibrated food to every meeting in order to settle their Nabhis. At the end of Mother’s talk, the children stood up in front of Her Holiness and sang a song entitled, “Thank You, Mother.” Mother really enjoyed it and showed Her love to them the rest of the evening by letting them climb on Her lap, giving them sugar cubes from Her sugar bowl and even sharing Her water with a few thirsty toddlers. The children knew She was their Mother and felt very comfortable walking up to Her and asking Her for something or just planting kisses on Her cheeks. Mr. C.P. was also enjoying the affectionate expressions of the children who had surrounded him. After all, they had been told at Sahasrara Day Puja that he could now be called “Papaji.”

Following Mother’s talk there were jubilant bhajans and Mother joined in by playing the harmonium. Later Shri Mataji excused Herself, and went upstairs to prepare for Her trip to Russia. Her lights were still on at 2:00 a.m. but She was already awake at 6:00 the next morning. The Sahaja Yogis were very pleased to find that Mother had left Her sari on the bed, leaving instructions that it be ready for Her return to Nirmala House on June 8th. It meant so much to Her children that She would be returning to Her room in Rome so soon.

The Divine Mother Blesses Russia, The Agnya Chakra
Report of Follow-Up Programs, Early 1990
Department of Curotology and Physiotherapy, Sochi
The first meeting was arranged through Head Doctor Alekseev Valery Izmailovich, and was attended by him and another eight specialists including the Administrative Director. All nine were blessed with their self-realisation by the Grace of their Divine Mother.

Their very good experience prompted them to bring a teenage girl suffering from epilepsy for an experiment with Sahaja Yoga. This child had a problem beyond the control of specialists, and had been to all of the best institutions in Russia without any positive results. The Divine Mother blessed this child with her self-realisation. Working on her Agnya helped open her heart, and from a closed, sick personality she spontaneously transformed into a fully-blossomed flower. This experience prompted them to arrange another meeting where 35 specialist doctors came for realisation.

In order to make them realise that the Divine Mother belongs to the entire universe and Sahaja Yoga is very simple, the birthright of every human being, the experience of self-realisation for this group was channeled through Dr. Alexander. He was hesitant at first, but after working on his centre heart, he became confident. The simplicity of Sahaja Yoga was proved when all the specialist doctors present got their experience.

In the next meeting, 15 patients were worked on, using Sahaja techniques, in the presence of the 35 specialist doctors and one psychiatrist. The atmosphere was very heavy due to the egos of all of these specialists and the negative energy of the patients. The Attention guided [the yogis] to give self-realisation first to dissolve the aggressive egos. This time, self-realisation was amazingly granted with just the simple prayer from the heart to the photograph, “Please come in my heart.” Some blockages were also cleared when they forgave everyone. It was a tremendous blessing. Their first experience lasted approximately 50 minutes and there were no questions left! During the experience these specialists were laughing, crying, and opening up due to the loving security of their Mother. All they wanted were photographs of the Divine Mother. All of the 15 patients experienced our Mother’s Love and, as observed by the doctors, there was a considerable improvement in the balance of various energy levels. Shri Vishnumaya was helping to clear the Vishuddhis by way of lightning. The Mother and child relationship was established and now most of the residents of this medical institute have beautiful relationships with our Mother through Her photograph.

A miracle occurred: the little girl with epilepsy is now cured of “incurable” epilepsy and her doctors are convinced about the possibilities of Sahaja Yoga. The encephalogram (scan of the brain) is clear. The medical institute is very keen on starting a Sahaja Yoga centre for its patients and have invited our brother, Dr. Deepak Chugh of Delhi University, to assist them.

Dr. Alexander is also a student of English at the Institute for Foreign Languages. He arranged a beautiful meeting in this institute where all 23 students and their teacher experienced realisation.

Education System, Sochi
Mr. Pradanov, the headmaster of Sochi, is responsible for 100,000 people. He is enamoured with the simplicity of Sahaja Yoga and the beautiful relationship between the “eternal child” and “the eternal Mother.” His niece was cured of a mental disorder and it was a thrilling experience for all present to see her blossoming, smiling and relaxed after she received realisation. He then arranged meetings with the headmasters and teachers of various important schools in Sochi.

At the Institute of the Mentally Retarded, a 5-6 year old child with an eye problem was able to open his eyes after receiving vibrations at the Vishuddhi chakra. Previously, the headmaster and the teacher at this institute were always tense due to negative forces. They now have their Mother to protect and help them.

The Sahaja Yoga experience in Sochi was so lasting and deep that a second visit to Sochi was arranged. Mr. Pradanov conveyed his experiences to colleagues and to the Education Minister, Mr. Shadrikov. The programme during the second visit was like a relay race of giving self-realisation. In three days about 16 different important institutions were involved. On an average there were 50 specialists, headmasters and teachers at each meeting. At one session with Intourist, 54 responsible people and their area manager got their realisation. Their experience lasted for 40 minutes. Amazingly, this happened to them during the time of the day when they would normally be under peak tensions.

Before the second Sochi programme, sister Helen, the interpreter, had telephoned from Sochi, deeply worried about bad weather conditions. There had been continuous rain storms, uprooted trees, and lightning for one whole week. She was assured that with our Divine Mother’s Grace all the elements would help Sahaja Yoga. There was no rain the next day and bright sunshine the remaining three days. Helen talked about this happening to all the new seekers. She was really enamoured at the blessings of the “Living Godmother.” She and her mother have been practicing Sahaja Yoga and have grown tremendously.

A few children (new seekers) brought flowers to the programmes for their Mother. After the day’s programme, the flowers were taken to the Black Sea, which is known to be a sacred sea. The people in this area worship the Father figure, Neptune, with a trident in His hand, as Father of the sea which protects them. As the blessed flowers touched the sea water, there was a gush of very strong, soothing vibrations.

Albica
Mr. Pradanov and a farmer named Dima arranged a visit to the village of Albica, located at the border of Georgia and Armenia. It was a 50-mile journey, including a tough portion through hills. Surprisingly, none of the travelers felt fatigued during this very rough ride through a heavy downpour on a semi-paved road full of potholes. The rain was clearing the negativity. Our brother Dima has got a large area of land and a building which houses a primary school in this village. He wants the school to be run according to Sahaja principles. The teacher of the school is already a Sahaja Yogi. He knew about Mother so there were no words needed — straightaway he came and embraced me, to the amazement of the others. It was an eternal experience. He knew it would all happen. He, like so many Russians, are waiting for their Mother’s Love. His wife’s heart opened after just a little working on Her Agnya. She suddenly blossomed with joy — she did not know what to do. She took out her accordion and started playing as an expression of her joy. There are no words to describe this. This family is now singing the glory of the advent of their Divine Mother in these beautiful mountains.

Another farming family is practicing Sahaja Yoga. Their depth is reflected in their Christmas greetings:

TO WISH PEACE ON EARTH
LUCK!
CHRISTMAS!
SALUTATIONS!
REMEMBER SHRI MATAJI!

Kiev
The beautiful experience in Sochi was a help in Kiev. Initially there was resistance from the organisers before the programme, but after the programme the same, simple method of giving realisation did wonders. About 600 people had a very deep experience of their Mother’s Love. After the programme, about 150 people stayed on for personal attention.

There was a live TV interview for the Kiev University Circuit. A photograph taken in Moscow of the Divine Mother with vibrations behind Her was shown on TV, and all were requested to stretch their hands towards the photograph and request the Eternal Mother to come in their hearts. The whole studio was filled with vibrations and a number of those present got their self-realisation. All this happened in the space of only two minutes.

The same TV interviewer, who was a student and who knew very little English, was requested to come and help us in the programme as an interpreter. To his own amazement, a little working on his Agnya and Heart transformed him into a seasoned interpreter. Since he was involved in communicating with over 400 brothers and sisters regarding their problems, he was blessed with a deep experience of Sahaja Yoga. Now he is convinced of Mother’s Love and is now enjoying the vibrations by practicing Sahaja Yoga.

There was a miracle involving a lady with a stiff right arm and no strength in her hand. While working on her, a scarf with Mother’s vibrations was tied around her Visshudhi chakra and suddenly she was able to move her arm and felt strength in her hand. The scarf had been used to cover a chair that Shri Mataji had used in Leningrad.

Leningrad
More of the same beautiful experiences were shared in Leningrad. While about 15 people out of 600 were not willing to dissolve their identity (ego) in the Divine Mother’s Love, most of the seekers enjoyed the experience, the union with their Mother. A lady cancer patient has started enjoying Mother’s Love and is feeling better.

Moscow
A miracle occurred when the Russian Sahaja Yogi leader sent your correspondent to work on an ailing girl who was coming to the programmes. This time there were seven patients. While working on them, suddenly a young boy of 17 went into a trauma; his body started twisting. The first thought was to summon a doctor, but then the Attention guided me to ask the boy to look at Mother’s bindi through the flame of a candle. He held the candle and a badge with Mother’s photgraph was held in front of his eyes. He was made to repeat, “Mother! Please help! Mother! Please help!” We were all praying to Mother to help and after 18 minutes the boy said, “Oh! It has left my heart!” He became a radiant young man. His mother revealed that he had been baptised at a Church and at that time, he had really cried. He had been insane since then and was living in a separate flat in Moscow. Now he is full of love for his Eternal Mother and is sensitive to the vibrations.

Sahaja Yoga School In Dharamsala
A number of Indian and western children are now attending the new boarding school in Dharamsala, which is located in the foothills of the Himalayas. The school was already complete and running when the westerners arrived just after Easter Puja, although a few extensions are still being added in anticipation of the arrival of more children. There are currently about 12 western and 3 Indian children boarding there and a score of children from the local villages are also attending during the day.

A Sahaja Yogini from Frankfurt recently visited the school. She was elated to see how wonderful it is and she could only encourage all parents to send their children there. At the moment, the staff are all Indians, and they are very loving and caring with the children. The accommodations for the children are beautiful; each dorm room is carpeted and is attached to a bathroom with cold and hot water. The vibrations, needless to say, are wonderful: even the most difficult children were completely transformed within 48 hours.

Shri Mataji’s Itinerary
(Subject to Change)

May 11-16
Travel in Russia; Meet with Russian Health Minister and Party Head; Shri Buddha Puja

May 25
Departure from London to New York

May 26 – 31
San Diego

May 28
American National Puja in San Diego

May 30 & 31
Public Programs, San Diego

June 1 – 3
Fort Lauderdale (Miami); Public program on June 3

June 4 – 7
New York; Program at the United Nations on June 6; Public program on June 7

June 8
Arrival in Rome

June 9 – 13
Barcelona; Shri Mahavira Puja

June 14 – 16
Madrid

June 17 – 20
Paris

June 21 – 23
Milan

June 24 – 27
Greece; Mahalakshmi Puja

June 28 – 29
Istanbul, Turkey; Shri Fatima Puja

June 30, July 1, 2
London

July 3 – 6
Austria

July 7 – 9
France; Guru Puja in Lyon, France on July 8

July 10 – 13
London

July 14
Travel to Miami

July 15 – 18
Bogota, Colombia; Vishnumaya Puja

July 19 – 20
Peru

July 21 – 22
Bolivia

July 23 – 24
Chile

July 25 – 26
Argentina

July 27 – 31
Brazil; Mahakali Puja

August 1
Miami

August 2 – 5
San Diego; Shri Krishna Puja on August 4

August 6 – 8
Los Angeles

August 9 – 10
Vancouver; Shri Saraswati Puja

August 11
Cincinnati

August 12 – 13
Toronto

August 14 – 18
London

August 19 – 22
Switzerland

August 23 – 26
Austria; Shri Ganesha Puja, Vienna, August 24

August 27 – 30
Germany; Shri Hanumana Puja, Munich, August 29

Aug. 31 – Sept. 1
Frankfurt

September 2 – 4
Belgium and Holland

September 5 – 9
Hong Kong

September 10-14
Taiwan; Shri Quan Yin Puja

September 15
Japan, then to Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur and Nepal

October
To Bombay

October 21
Navaratri Puja, Milan, Italy

November
To London

November 17
Diwali Puja, Pune

December 1 – 3
India Tour begins in Alibagh

December 4 – 7
Pune

December 8 – 10
Aurangabad

December 11 – 15
Rahuri

December 16 – 18
Brahmapuri

December 19 – 20
Kolhapur

December 21 – 31
Ganapati Pule

Copyright © 2026 Nirmala Vidya Amruta. All Rights Reserved. Privacy | Terms of Use | Amruta is supported by the WordPress Multilingual Plugin. | oska.dev
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
About WordPress
Nirmala Vidya Amruta
Hi, Prashant handge
Search