SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 1992-09-09
TALK: Arrival to Cincinnati Airport
LOCATION/EVENT: united-nations-headquarters-new-york-united-states
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:20:46
CHARS: 41944
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
Post navigation
Previous post:
Unless and until you have the actualisation of this experience, you cannot become divine
Next post:
Arrival to Cincinnati Airport
Peace…It is within yourself
United Nations Headquarters, New York (United States)  View Map
Wednesday, September 9th, 1992 
1 Comment
Public Program
Transcript (English) – Draft
English
Audio
Video DP-RAW
New York, United Nations Headquarters, United States
AI-generated transcript V2
70'
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English

1992-09-09 Public Program United Nations USA DP-RAW, 75′
Show Video Details 
This page is also available on the Learn Sahaja Yoga website. We encourage you to share it widely to spread Sahaja Yoga knowledge! 
Dear Sahaja Yogis, a machine-generated transcript for this talk is available on a separate review page, organised by section under a header marked with post ID 79724. It has not yet been reviewed by our team, and your help in checking it for accuracy is warmly welcome. Send corrections · View transcript awaiting review. 
IMPORTANT NOTICE: This text has NOT been verified. Would you like to help us verify? For more info, please click here. Please note that the text may be incomplete and contain errors, so caution is advised; we recommend cross-checking it with the original audio/video material. 


9 September 1992
Public Program
United Nations Headquarters, New York (United States)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
[Introduction]
We have been associated for a very long time with United Nations as the wife of Sir C.P.Srivastava who has been long standing as Secretary General of the International Nations in London UNCLEAR thankful today as you are here this is because you have devoted your entire life to sharing and providing access to seekers UNCLEAR and this is what today’s program is about so that second birth becomes something else and eventually UNCLEAR of the team of lectures that Unclear happening because of thatUNCLEAR happening civilisation of our potential state of awareness UnCLEAR that consequently experienced so far.UNCLEAR and outside, and we do not have a very long period of time to seek

I believe that we do not have a very long period of time to learn here. I would not like to talk any longer. Unclear exchange at the end of the program.UNCLEAR Thank you very much, Mataji, for coming here.

[Shri Mataji speech]
I bow to all the seekers of truth. At the very outset, we have to know that truth is what it is. We can not change it. We can not describe it. Also, unfortunately, at this human level we can not feel it. So one has to be a little humble about it, that so far we have not known the truth.  The Absolute Truth. In all religions, it is described that you have to have your second birth. Means you have to have your selfhood, that you have to have self-knowledge. Every religion has talked about it. Despite that, the religions have not been spirit-oriented. They are either power-oriented or money-oriented. Any amount of science can not give you your ascent, and any amount of reading can not do that. You have to ‘become.’All kinds of things people have done in the search for truth. I mean, there have been so many seekers in this modern times. William Blake has said clearly that the men of God will be born and they’ll seek the truth, and they will make the others divine. That’s  the time today has come. But one must understand that it is our evolutionary process by which you actualize the experience of your spirit . It is ‘actualization’. It is not talking about it. The truth is that you are not this body, mind, these conditionings, ego and UN jobs, but you are the ‘pure spirit’.Unless and until you  find a ’pure spirit’ you can never be satisfied. You may be identified with any organisation, with any kind of a cult, or any kind of an idea. That is not going to give you satisfaction.It is just ego satisfaction. What you have to get to know is ‘yourself’ by which a real benevolence is achieved. And for that a mechanism is placed within us already. For living process we don’t pay anything. You see here flowers. How much did we pay to mother earth or to this bush of flowers?Nothing?So you can’t pay for it. That is one thing we should understand. You can’t pay for your evolution. Secondly, we have become human beings and that we have achieved this without paying much effort about it. So it is effortless, to stand on your head or to read books or to think that we are all going to achieve it after our death, is not true.

So many things have come like yarn from the heads of some people and people just follow as if they have no personality. They have no understanding. Have we found the solution?UN is there, I know. My husband has been working for the United Nations for sixteen years then he resigned ultimately. But despite all that one has to know, has U N achieved its goals? No. What is the reason for all these problems? From where does this basis of problems come in? Humanbeings are responsible for most of the human problems. Not the divine. And these problems come to us from our own being, our own centres which are the subtle centres within us. When these centres go into jeopardy we get into trouble . Physical, mental, emotional. But when these centres are put right you are all right. I am very happy to tell you that we have three doctors in India who have got their MD in curing some very incurable diseases. And there are seven doctors in England who are now recording how many people have been cured through Sahajayoga. Without it you can not get free from your physical, mental,emotional problems. Because your centres are out of gear they are undernourished, dislocated,and have no connection with the whole.These centres are to be enlightened, but we are so much used to bombastic advertisement, and all kinds of marketing that we take to such things much more.I mean,like somebody comes dressed up in say orange dress we are very much impressed. Some of them might be coming directly from jails. Superficially if you start looking at it, there’s a market even for seekers, and so many are lost.I am sorry to say so many are lost because they do not seek their benevolence. They should find out what did we find? You should  find out from the disciples what did they find out.It is an inner built-in system, already there existing within you, which gives you this experience of the spirit, because you are the ‘pure spirit’.You are not this body, this mind, this conditioning and ego like I told you. You are the ‘pure spirit’.And there is an all-pervading power which is named by different names like Islam calls it ‘Ruh’.In India they call it ‘paramachaitanya’.In the Bible it is called as ‘all-pervading power of Gods love’ or  you can  say, is the’ cool breeze of the Holy Ghost’. You have never felt it before that it existed.It does exist. Who does all  this living works ? Who did our  this evolution? Who gave us this brain? We take it for granted and this kind of attitude towards ourselves is very detrimental to our spiritual growth.

The   most important  thing is to understand that all these problems come to us from within.Genetic problems.They also are there.Of course genetically we are different, maybe we can say we have races.Alright agreed,but who is the superior race?. Who belongs to the superior race?Those who are aggressive, those who kill people, those who indulge into all kinds of nonsensical things,stupid idiotic people.Are they of a superior level or those who keep  themselves pure, who keep themselves simple, who are full of compassion.The saints.But I have to tell you one thing that whatever you might have done, whatever wrongs you  might have done , and so called but divinity within you is absolutely intact.You might have followed any false guru, you  might have followed any false things,you might have done something which is not rightous but divinity cannot be touched, because it is eternal.It’s like some clouds have covered the sun.It is there.Only it has to manifest.And to  manifest it there is an instrument within.This knowledge is not modern.It is very  ancient knowledge and if it comes say from India, yeah, especially a lady one should not doubt it.We have had lots of knowledge from the West about  science and much more from men. So doesn’t matter if a lady can tell you something. But one has to understand that we have overgrown outside.We are extroverts. There must be some development within so this is the knowledge of our roots.I don’t say you should  accept me blindfolded at all, because you are free to ascend or go to hell. Noboby can stop.This freedom has been  given to you.So nobody can stop it. You can ruin yourself you can destroy yourself, do what you like with yourself but there is a path by which you can absolutely enter into the kingdom of God.

Now see the problems that we have . The first thing that happens to you when self-realization takes place, it happens because there is a power within us in the triangular bone , called sacrum. Kundalini.It is called Kundal. Kundal means coils, because it is coiled up in three and a half coils. This power is there. You can see in some people, it pulsating,  when it rises. And when it pierces through your fontanelle bone area then it gets connected to this ‘all-pervading power’. It’s not just putting your hand on the fontanelle and I should say now you are baptized. No.Its an  actualisation.If you say you are a self-realised person,you are twice born.It is not just a certificate I am twice born.Supposing tomorrow I put a label  that I am the member of UN, I am not, because I have no powers.If you are a twice born person who have to have some powers.If you are a ‘spiritual person you have to have some ‘spiritual powers’,otherwise you are not. So as a result of this happening, first of all as I told  you when this Kundalini passes through your different centres, it nourishes it.These are actually seven centres but the kundalini passes through six centres.These centres are made of left and right side. Sympathetic nervous system and parasympathetic in the centre and this is the centre about which I am talking. This is the central path which Buddha has described.So this power  is the residual power which rises, passes through these centres.

Last time I did tell you about what are the problems of bureaucrats and if you want I can repeat them again. Little bit.My husband has been a bureaucrat all his life so and  I have been always in contact with so many bureaucrats all my life, I mean that’s my  another life.Their main problem is that they think too much.And thinking too much causes a very big problem .(You don’t have the thing). Here (pointing to the chart) if you see the second centre, the yellow one which looks after our liver , our pancreas, spleen,kidneys and the lower part of the intestines. Also it has a very important function to convert the fat cells for the use of the brain.This is much more important.So when you think too much all the time, this conversion goes  on at the other subsidiary jobs. You can call them like,  looking after the liver and all these things is neglected.So physically first thing that happens is your liver goes out.With the liver it has a job of converting all poison into heat and emitting it out. But it can not, it doesn’t function. So the heat is accumulated.With this heat you get hot tempered,nervous then heat rises upward .When it rises upward there is  another centre we call right heart. This if it is caught up into that, heat gives you asthma. Supposing that heat doesn’t rise higher and moves sideways, then it attacks your pancreas and you  get diabetes. Mostly the bureaucrats get  diabetes.Surprising.Supposing in a village you go, in India, they take at least three to four spoons of sugar  every day, the villagers.They never get diabetes.They don’t know what that disease is.The reason is, they don’t think.They lead a very simple life, sleep well,enjoy themselves.Then after that is even more dangerous thing is the spleen. The spleen becomes extremely hectic with people who are doing such important works.You have to be in time.You become a slave of your watch all the time, then their bosses are there, the newspaper,everything is quite shocking.I mean,you have to have sensationalisation. Newspaper is not here.Today I am not surprised because there is no sensation in getting Self-realisationtion.So the sensationalisation acts on our mind and as a result we become hectic, and when we become hectic this poor spleen doesn’t know how to carry on, producing red blood corpuscles for the use of emergencies.So the attack comes and what you get is blood cancer.You will be happy to know that blood cancer has been completely cured by Sahaja yoga.Completely, with out changing any blood or anything of many people.Three of them were architects.One of them was a bureaucrat .After that this heat can heat your  kidneys;and thats how you stop your kidney functioning.You have to take dialysis, as a certificate for you to spend  money and die.Doctors will never tell you dialysis doesn’t help.It doesn’t cure.They want to give you hope.And  lastly what you get is the constriction of your intestine and you get constipated and all the problems of the constipation.All these things happen to you because of one centre.So imagine there all these  seven centres which are to be put right and unless and until we do something about it we are in for trouble, not  only physically, also  mentally, also spiritually  because there are many gurus and many things in the market. Just,I don’t know they mesmerize or do what they like, they achieve nothing. They talk of something that the world is going to collapse or something we must do for peace.

 What can they do for peace?So many people have got peace awards, but if you meet their privately, you have to use a barge pole. So hottempered I tell you.Impossible.There is no peace within.How can you give peace to anyone?Now where is this peace?  It is not outside.It is within yourself.With realisation you are on the periphery outside of a wheel.You jump  onto your axis.Axis is silent and you start watching all your activity like a witness .Become absolutely peaceful ,and you watch it and you witness it. This witnessing state has been described in so many scriptures, but nobody thinks that if you have to be ‘spiritual‘ we have to develop that witnessing state.Firstly when Sahajayoga arrived here,above this centre which is optic charisma , you become thoughtlessly aware.In Sanskrit it is called ‘nirvichar samadhi’.’Thoughtlessly but aware’.You are  absolutely aware.You are all the time  jumping on the cusp of the future  or the past thoughts.But, by this, you establish yourself in the present, and in the present there is no thought.There’s where you grow spiritually.All religions have told about this in this way or that way but if the whole direction of this religion is towards power and  towards money, how can you reach that state?It’s not talking big or describing something great, or surmonising but it is something that has to happen within ourselves. You have to ‘ become’ something.Even in Koran, Muhammad Saheb has said, “in time of Qayamat your hands will speak”. This is exactly what happens  in Sahajayoga that you can feel your centres on your fingertips.

Everyone has talked about it , but we are not looking at it. I was surprised I was in Russia and thousands, thousands came to Sahajayoga and got it and so deeply.Communism has done some good to them I must say. Definitely. This kind of freedom to choose to abandon  all value system has been of no help to us. I don’t know what to say about their government, but the people are so beautiful and they shun all other nonsense .They are so sensitive to spirituallality.I mean this hall would not even fit in for a small village there, you will be surprised.I had to always arrange big big stadiums. Thank God they have lots of stadium in every place, but if you come to  so called democratic countries, I don’t know what has happened to them.Maybe I don’t know, maybe the media maybe the so called freedom that we have misused ;maybe our attention  has lost that capacity to feel the divinity.It shifts so fast, people are so shifty.One has to respect one self as a human being because there is divinity within .Animals don’t have that.There is divinity within you and unless until you get your divine manifesting, how are you going to know what you are?You are fantastic.I tell you you are fantastic. But first you have to be connected to that ‘all pervading power’.Without connection  this has no meaning. (Pointing to the mic) In the same way you have no meaning till you are connected. 

I read one book recently, the limits of science and there he  asked three questions which science can not answer. How are we here? What are we here for? What are we going to do? All these three questions can be answered in Sahajayoga after self-realisation.It is surprising that in the West there are so many seekers  but they don’t understand what they are seeking. Just by proclaiming something ,we are this and that they have achieved nothing.You can not achieve anything just by saying we are this and we are that.So  something has to happen.Now this transformation takes place in no time, and everybody can get this transformation that you get yourself. In short I’ll try now to describe you the nature of science and the nature of the spirit. Science  is not conclusive.Science doesn’t give you absolute truth. It goes on changing from this to that. If we had known ‘absolute truth’ there would have been no quarrel ,no fight,everybody says the same thing.But we don’t know the ‘absolute truth’. Thats why we have theories,we have so many cults, so many ideas,so many we can say dogmas,all kinds of things.But if we know  the ‘absolute truth’ how can we quarrel ?Then we know the ‘absolute’ .We know that .All of us will know the same because spirit is a universal  being. United Nations established to create universality in human beings. But unless and until they get self-realisation they cannot.After getting  self realisation only they will realise that you are a ‘universal being.’These racist, these countries and these various things which separate man from man are artificial,armetical. .Basically you are a universal being .So the first thing you realise you are a  universal being, so that you can of course feel your own centres on your fingertips, and also you can feel the centres of others on your fingertips.It actually happens to you.And when you feel these centres,if you know how to correct yours, and correct the others, problem is solved.Then you don’t have to worry about illness. This is a  mother’s   style of putting some chocolate on top.Somehow it should go into your sharp intelligence,that we have to still achieve for which we are born.But we have to respect our selves, that’s the main point, I think is missing;that we don’t respect ourselves as human being.That there is  a little ‘breakthrough’  now, more, left to us. Then the second very important thing about the nature of Spirit is that you become absolutely peaceful ,absolutely dynamic at the same time you are extremely compassionate., Extremely compassionate, and just your concern is not only for yourself, for your own problems,but for the whole world.I will give you a very simple example, I went to Russia and the people who arrived by the first flight were 25 Germans.Young German sahajayogis . I asked them,I said, “how are you here?”So they said,  “Mother is it not our responsibility to be here.”I said ,“no not  yours.Your forefathers.”They said,”but we are responsible also for our forefathers, that’s why we are here.” and they had tears in their eyes, and the way they held these Russian’s,I tell you .Day and night the way they worked on them it’s really remarkable.So the compassion becomes so pure that you  don’t expect anything. You just want to  really give love .A pure love to every one and then you establish yourself into universal religion.That means you respect all the religions, all the essences of the religion and you see the relationship that exists between  them which is very strong and you find that all these religions were born on the same tree of spirituality ,only we have plucked them.We are fighting with these dead flowers.These dead flowers,this  is my religion and this is my religion,this is my religion, so  you have fundamentalism. When you become a universal personality,your  religion is universal, it encompasses all the religions ;which many people don’t like  I was surprised; Dalai Lama said,  “’we don’t want to have a universal religion because we are different people’”. How are we different I would like to know? We smile the same way, we laugh the same way, we cry the same way .We have the same feelings.How are we different because  we have different  hair or different skin, we should not be like robots, or regimented. We have to be different .That is the variety, which makes life so interesting and beautiful. Because we are different to look at. You just open your skin and find everybody has the same nerve,the same muscle,everything there intact .Just the same.Its just  a skin deep difference.It just vanishes into thin air. We have  very good seminars in India. Sometimes we get 3000 people from 55 countries and I have never seen them quarreling with each other.Never.Never fighting. Such love.Of course they pull each others legs alright.Lot of humour.  That’s all.But such fun, such enjoyment, we are missing it all.Why? Without self realisation  you cannot workout United Nations,I can tell you that.You cannot because the attention is more on other things than your Spirit which has promoted this idea of United Nations. We have to be at the level of our ‘spirit’ to understand the essence of United Nations.It’s not bureaucracy,It’s not any   nations or any race but it’s ourselves who has to achieve it.It is for our benevolence we have to achieve it. I am privileged to come  and talk to you because I feel sometimes very close. I’ve been here many a times before also and  to celebrate so many of your functions I have been with my husband here, but that’s a different line. This is a much more important subject which has substance in it. By the time you leave United Nations you shouldn’t  feel what did we get? What you have to get is this ‘universal nature of your spirit’ . That has to be achieved through self realisation.I think the employees of UN have to take to it but I was surprised that they are more attached  to things which have more show and people are doing all kinds of marketing.It cannot be marketing,one thing one should understand.It cannot be some show business it is something genuine.How can you live with something which is not genuine?Moreover it is so relaxing because  everything now is worked out through the ‘divine power’ which looks after it, which manages everything. All your problems are solved .Even material problems are solved. That’s what we say the ‘blessings ‘.Now in England you must be knowing that the unemployment is the highest, but not a single sahajayogies who is there who has not got employment. Everyone who has come to Sahaja Yoga has prospered because your attention becomes so alert;because you become so wise.You  become brilliant. Ofcourse My husband was a very very brilliant man, no doubt. He got this job  because of his brilliance and very capable of everything. But he says now I have the peace of mind. Now he is a sahajayogy.If you have this at that time when you are working you will be surprised you become really dynamic.And the amount of blessings you will have every  moment you will feel the blessings coming out .Ofcourse every evening you have to just meditate for ten minutes .That’s all.Just 10 minutes you have to give to yourself just to see that this connection is alright because in the beginning it dwindles a  little bit ,it comes up and goes down. You have to fix it and just to check if this connection is alright or not.Ten minutes you have to meditate. Moreover it is a collective happening.That the Micrososm has become the macrocosm. That you have become ‘part and parcel of the whole ‘. As said, ‘Akbar is the great body of the divine‘ ,you have become part and parcel of that ;and supposing a  nail is cut out, it will not grow? So you have to belong to that body. Of course you have not to pay for it again I must tell you.There are some organisations who will just have an introductory lecture and then will be money making lectures.It’s  not like that in Sahajayoga.Of course I mean supposing you have to arrange some hall or something,  you have to pay for that , that’s alright, but not for your evolution, not for your self knowledge and for all the subtle knowledge of this subtle instrument within you and this instrument is meticulous.It is not like one theory of Avogadro challenged  by another and then Einstein theory challenged by another.No. You can not challenge it. It is absolute .It is so efficient.It is Absolute. It doesn’t fail. It is meta science.You can call it,it is meta modern. It is so fantastic, but we can’t believe that we are fantastic. We have no faith in ourselves.This is our biggest problem.What I have to tell you that, this world is not going to be ruined. There are many organisation these days afloat saying that you better release some money from your purse otherwise this world will be destroyed .Such absurd things. I don’t know how we accept.How can money save this world. God doesn’t understand money.He doesn’t understand banking ,does He?So for intelligent people it is very easy to understand that, a time has come for us to achieve that self knowledge. Luckily, you have a very good  centre here also, though those who are  running it are very disappointed because they say people are not responsive.I am surprised.Ican’t believe that in United Nations, we don’t have seekers of truth. I can’t believe it. So many things you achieve which I cannot describe in this short lecture, but one thing I can tell you that you just jump in the ‘ocean of joy.‘ This joy cannot be described because it is so  singular,absolute . It has to be experienced. Whatever maybe your age, whatever maybe your race, whatever you may be you just enjoy human beings.You don’t have to leave your society. You don’t have to divorce. You don’t have to give up your family. You don’t have to go to Himalayas and stand on your head, nothing.Nothing  of that kind.It’s already there. You have done all this in your last lives.This life you just get the reward of what you have done .Its  very simple. All of you can get it.After all you are serving  your nations and serving United Nations. It’s a very blissful thing you are doing and why not you get it. I know these days that are some other problems which you are facing, but if you build up your spiritual forces, all these problems can be solved very easily because above all is the power of divine love which we have never used .We have only used the power of hatred and you just try to use that power you will be amazed.How powerful you are.    You can give realisation to others ,  you can cure people ,you can cure yourself. You can know about everything about this subtle divine knowledge. Now then you read Bible  and then you read Koran then you read Gita you will know between  the lines what is there.I have been so much associated with United Nations and always I felt tremendous love for all the people who are working with it but sometimes it is difficult to convey. Christ has said,”meek in the heart will inherit the earth that meekness should be there,that’s all, that we have to have it. May God bless you. I’m sorry I have to go to some other place and if somebody has some questions I would like to answer for there is little time I could devote to that. 

[Question and answers session]

Question UNCLEAR claimed that Leukemia has been cured and the cassette which I heard, that Aids has been cured. 

Shri Mataji: Yeah.

Question continued:Now if that is true I think the Holiness is letting the world down by not preventing millions of people dying from Aids UNCLEAR 

Shri Mataji: Yeah.Sir I would like to tell you in this America if  we try curing people we all will land up in jail.

People clapping 

Shri Mataji: That is the law.You don’t know.They come to UNCLEAR .We cannot do it.Law is in favour of doctors.If I try anything here I assure you we’ll end up in jail. Even if you are from the UN.It is a very funny law I know that.

Person from the audience: It is all over the world.

Shri Mataji: Then it is alright. Then we have places where you can come and you can be cured. Just one thing I will tell you. We are not here for curing people only. Otherwise thousands will be coming, how will you become aware.We are here to make you doctors .So you become the doctor and  you can cure.You can.It’s a fact.Why should I tell you a lie. What’s the use? It’s a fact. You can cure.  You need not be a doctor. Very simple method.I tell you the reason because we are being the fundamentalists of which we are doing.Supposing you have to treat a tree, you start looking after the leaves or the branches or the bark you can’t.You have to go to the roots.If you know how to reach the roots you can cure on your own.UNCLEAR Also I am not afraid to say that.You have very funny thing.They don’t want to live first of all and they don’t want to give up their bad habits.Such a state we are in  that you cannot   tell them UNCLEAR . You  cannot. You understand that.So now if you want to try, you can try to  prove it if I have said something wrong.It’s not a challenge but it is an offer.So we are dying but they will not come to Sahaj.Why  not  you all become doctors yourself and do it?You can.Who wants to do that?Lets see.Put up your hands?What about you, sir, who asked the question?You should do it.

Person with the question : I am very sorry I am still unconvinced.I am only suggesting that you will be doing the greatest in Gods name.

Shri Mataji: I am. I am doing.

Questioner: UNCLEAR all over the world. Don’t blame America.

Shri Mataji: No, no. I am not blaming America.I am just saying the law is bad here ,that’s all. I am not blaming America for that.I am not blaming anyone.But what I am trying to  say that it can be done when people as you said that thousands, so you need at least one thousand doctors .How can they all approach you?So I want you to get this power.Its in you to get this  UNCLEAR .It is one months time you can do it.Its a fact.It is fantastic. Now as you know you can trust my husband ,you can ask him.I am sure he can tell.I  am alone.I am travelling everyday,going   from places to places.You are doctors, you don’t have to go to any medical college.

Questioner: The question was from a medical doctor.

Shri Mataji: We have a doctor here who has done research UNCLEAR on asthma.I tell you please if you doctors open your mind a little bit you can help thousands.I am so happy to know because I myself have done Medicine. But I found that Medicine  also sometimes conditions us.There is something beyond. Somebody is asking a question.

Question UNCLEAR Spondilitis

Shri Mataji: Spondylitis.It is absolutely curable. Spondylitis.When you feel heat you  get it.Unclear alright.Are you a Catholic?Then you will get it.

Audience laughing 

Shri Mataji: Now you are  a sahaj  you get rid of it.

Sahajayogi:I am sorry we can take one or two more  question and then if  Shri Mataji would you like to end with her meditation?I don’t know whether You have time?

Shri Mataji: No.We have  to go now but what I am saying,  it should  be left open to them.You should, please take it seriously.We should join , meet these people and learn it and if you can prove I am wrong I will be very happy to accept it .It is not so because I know what you are.I can see much more than you can see yourself in the mirror. That’s what I am saying, the divinity is there.I will be  very happy but do you  think    WHO will  ever listen to me.Doctor? Straight forward question.Though I knew the secretary general, I have met him. I know him very well, but never opened my mouth to him. So conditioning .They can’t see beyond medicine, anything. I’m very happy you are such a compassionate view of the whole thing. If you have, I’m sure you can work it out. Who else. 

Question: UNCLEAR

Sahaja yogi: Shri Mataji , I will just try to  summarize. There are just now in Somalia there are millions of people starving and children dying  and just give them something to eat is hypocrisy. What can we do about it?

Shri Mataji: I agree with you .It is not hypocrisy I would  say to that extent but that doesn’t solve the problem.

Sahajayogi: The question is, are such people born in those places paying their past karma?

Shri Mataji: We shouldn’t say like that.That’s being  very harsh to say they are paying for the karma of all of us I should say because you’re such disparities.We have such wrong ideas. It’s  a collective, whatever it is.How do you solve your food problem?Now  if I tell you,you wont believe.If you have vibrated water, you can grow 10 times more what you are growing today.Ecological problems can be solved also.We have experimented, but who listens to us. It’s a thing ’little beyond our mind’.If you can just jump into that state you can see it clearly. Ecological problem we  have tried some very simple method by which we have solved the problem, but for that you have to really feel the way doctor is feeling for everyone that we have to do something about it.If I say we have something within us which can work it out why not get it?So precious.Yes, madam(.pointing to the next question)

Question: UNCLEAR. This lady is coming from Ridgeford,a city in  Connecticut.She is writing for newspaper from there. She would like to know if you have a message for students who are learning via discipline UNCLEAR some process of spiritual learning.

Shri Mataji: It is not learning madam . It is something happening within you.Yes,yes we can ask some people and you can interview them and they will tell you. It has changed the attitude of children so  much you wont believe it.Absolutely.I mean children become so  beautiful afterwards and very intelligent, very dynamic, very wise. They talk like grandparents to us. Very sweet.So something that is in them, also, which has to manifest,  but you know what is the situation now. I was so shocked to hear that the police has abused 200 children.How can you do that?But they do it.Again no respect for your own children.I am happy you are concerned.Such a lot can be done for them. Absolutely. No doubt.We have some schools and we are working it out .Those children you must  meet.You will be amazed to see them.We have to save our children at least from this madness that is going on.In South England, London, there are 2000 children, 12 years of  age less than 12 years, are taking drugs.Shocking isn’t it?After getting this joyous  ‘ambrosia’ within yourself you just don’t do all these things. You just give up.I don’t say don’t do anything.I never say it but you will just not do it, will not do it.If we could  be of any help, it would be really great and these people are here. They’ll tell you how you can do it.Its very simple.And children are so sweet I tell you, so innocent it works so fast.They are the quickest to get selfrealisation. We have to save them, not by having organisations ‘to save the child,’’save the child’ but actually giving them their divinity. That’s all.

Question: Shri Mataji, last time I asked you two questions.I asked you if the process of self realisation was only, how could I know that it was a spiritual experience and not just physical experience and you said to study it and learn more about it and I plan of doing that and already I believe that it was spiritual experience and I had experienced it before and then practising Sahajayoga UNCLEAR and The other question I asked you was is your way the only way and a little hard to understand what I believe you were saying  that selfrealisation is the only way which I also believe

Shri Mataji: The first question that you asked me,I think  I answered it, didn’t  I?That you have to know what are the centres. You have to master it .That is the answer of the first.Alright.Now the second one you asked me is this the only  way. Now in a seed if  you know there is a prumule, that plumule  is the one it shoots off and becomes a shoot.That is  the only way.In the same, within you, in this triangular bone, which we call as sacrum, perhaps the Greek knew; they call it sacred bone, is this residual  energy, which is your prumule, which sprouts.But to become the tree you have to know all  about it.Alright, I have answered you.May God bless you.

Sahajayogi:Is there any other question? UNCLEAR

Shri Mataji: This lady asked some question you know?.

Sahajayogi: She asked me whether she could reach you after this program Shri Mataji.

Shri Mataj: Alright.

Sahajayogi and audience talking UNCLEAR

Sahajayogi:Yes.There is class UNCLEAR the class will take place in the Eastside Community Centre.Then after that we will present what has been just interaction we have very  little time UNCLEAR 

Question UNCLEAR

Shri Mataji: What is the question ?

Sahajayogi: The question is your husband was a very senior UNCLEAR and at that time you didn’t bring Sahajayoga to the UN, why is it so?

Shri Mataji: No, no.I didn’t think that UN was hopeless.

No, I didn’t think it was. What I felt   was my husband is a sort of a  big boss there. I should not try to use his position.It would not be good.Anytime I can get there.I know that .So it is better to be without that feeling that people get now. Look at this lady and most of them, Mrs. Chiang-Kai-shek, that lady, all of them doing lots of things like that with their position of their husbands. I didn’t want to bask in his glory. Moreover it is not proper.Let them have their freedom to decide and afterall I am  going to live, so I can manage them later. .(Laughing)Things I of thought that I should not sort of because it will be difficult for people to say no to Me.I did not want to take their freedom. Of course, I know UN people will come to Sahajayoga .I am sure of it, because whatever I know about them they are very  intelligent. Sooner or later. And they are concerned. Main thing is their concern.

Sahajayogi :UNCLEAR

Shri Mataji: I must tell you about Dr Mutali UNCLEAR .Outside very  interesting thing  happened that I was travelling by I think Vienna and he got into the plane and sat next to me Suddenly he started  asking me about Yoga and things like that and he came to know who I was.So he said are you the Mataji Nirmaladevi?I said, ‘yes I am, supposed to be’.So he said, why not you give me realisation.Isaid,”alright, have it”.And he had it.He had it in the aeroplane.He got his realisation in the aeroplane.And he said I was  going by another flight, but today I suddenly decided to come by this and he got it.While  this time, I was coming, I think in the plane I gave realisation to at least  25 people.Really. Remarkable.We never even felt the journey. Yes madam?

Sahajayogi: Would you consider doing it for us, is the question.

Shri Mataji: Realisation?

Sahajayogi : Yes

Shri Mataji: Because of your time business. I have to catch a plane, but you are quite capable of getting it.In no time. Just now you got it already. Put your hands towards me. See. Most of you must have felt it. Just put your hands. You feel a kind of a cool breeze in your hand or maybe hot sometimes. If it is hot, just forgive everyone, that’s all. Are you feeling, Madam? So you have got it. Lets see. How many are feeling? Put both your hands up? That’s it!. May God bless you. Now you have to just see how you grow into it. That’s all. I told you that I knew that I’ll get you and people in no time like this, imagine I didn’t do anything. Just worked out. You are just proving my faith in you. I think I should take your leave because I have to catch a plane. Sorry you see this plane business is terrible sometimes. May God bless. It’s time, about 10 minute,s Shri Mataji is talking to some person she knows in Marathi.

1 thought on “Peace…It is within yourself”
subashini says:
2025/09/18 at 14:48
Yes this is subashini.I am working on this talk by Shri Mataji.

Reply
Leave a Reply
Logged in as Prashant handge. Edit your profile. Log out? Required fields are marked *

Comment *


Copyright © 2026 Nirmala Vidya Amruta. All Rights Reserved. Privacy | Terms of Use | Amruta is supported by the WordPress Multilingual Plugin. | oska.dev
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
About WordPress
Nirmala Vidya Amruta
Hi, Prashant handge
Search