SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 1996-03-21
TALK: Nirmala Vidya Amruta
LOCATION/EVENT: 1996
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:25:12
CHARS: 96316
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
Post navigation
Previous post:
The Divine Cool Breeze, Feb-March 1996, Vol. 10, Nos. 1 and 2
Next post:
The Divine Cool Breeze, Aug-Sept 1996, Vol. 10, Nos. 7 and 8
The Divine Cool Breeze, April-May 1996, Vol. 10, Nos. 3 and 4.pdf
Books online | All Books
Monday, April 1st, 1996
DCB
Magazine
Online, PDF
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English
Google Drive
Birthday Puja 1996, Delhi, India
“It’s the love that you give and the love that you receive, which is not a love which is entangled into anything with any purpose, with any idea—but just to feel that love, pure love within yourself and within others is the greatest gift of the Divine. All other things are useless, you’ll find.”

—Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Birthday Puja, Delhi, India, March 21, 1996

CONTENTS
Birthday Puja 1996
Birthday Puja Talk Synopsis … 1
Birthday Puja Seminar … 6
Sahasrara Day Puja 1996
Sahasrara Day Puja Talk Synopsis … 8
Sahasrara Day Seminar … 11
108 Thank You’s to Shri Mataji … 12
Our Place in the Virata—Holland … 16
Looking a Little Bit into Heaven—An Enchanted Visit to Nepal … 18
A Project with Vibrated Seeds … 20
News from Around the World
Shri Mataji Wins International Le Plejade Peace Award … 21
Magsaysay Award for T. N. Seshan … 22
Some Special Moments in Cabella with Shri Mataji … 22
Genova Public Program, June 1996 … 22
Petali di Loto, the New Italian Newsletter … 23
The Theatre of Eternal Values … 23
Time to Act—Not to Discuss! Moscow Meeting, February 1996 … 23
New Ashram in Argentina … 25
Announcements … 26
Shri Mataji’s Itinerary … 26
Birthday Puja Talk Synopsis
March 21, 1996, Delhi, India

“Today I’m going to talk about the mind.” People do not know what the mind is. Sahaja Yogis understand that as human beings we are constantly reacting to external happenings either through ego, or because we are trained to do so, through superego, conditionings. These reactions form bubbles on the ocean of reality, and separate us from the reality. These bubbles are our thoughts which blast us all the time and we don’t know why they have come. By depending on this artificial mind we have no discretion to distinguish between good and bad. All evil things come from the mind, such as possessiveness, quarrels, and wars.

In this mind, which is only a myth, destructive ideas grow. Some people can impress and dominate others through books, lectures or mesmerism. Such people “put your mind into such a frame that you accept these destructive ideas for yourself individually or maybe for the collective.” So although the mind is a myth, we are working through it and with it all the time. We satisfy ourselves by saying, “My mind wants it.” The mind has no connection with reality.

Human beings believe that what they have created has come from their mind. This is not true. The theory of relativity came to Einstein in a similar way that realization came to Buddha: he was exhausted with effort and gave up completely, letting his attention rest. All of a sudden the theory of relativity dawned upon him. Many scientists have admitted that they do not know how ideas have come to them. Some have thought that the ideas have come from the mind, but most of them have realized that these ideas have come from a source of which they are not aware.

Sahaja Yogis understand that all such truths and discoveries come from the Paramchaitanya. “You know because you can feel it. You know it is there, but even when you know, you must know you have to go beyond your mind into thoughtless awareness, minimum. Always I tell you, meditate. Meditate because you should be in thoughtless awareness where you do not react.” You become the witness. The drama unfolds before you and you are not involved; you are at ease with yourself and you become the instrument of the All-Pervading Power. You realize that what you watch cannot affect you. In this state you see the reality of the whole situation.

If you are in the ocean, you may be afraid the waves may drown you. But once you enter into the boat, you can see the beauty of the waves. If you can learn how to swim, you can leave the boat to rescue others. “In that state you can give realization to others, you can put them in connection with the Divine Power. But first of all you must know how to become thoughtlessly aware.”

Some Sahaja Yogis reach thoughtless awareness for only a few seconds or minutes. This is because although you are yogis you still have many conditionings. In Sahaja Yoga you start to go beyond your conditionings. For instance if you are born in India, you are identified with India. But slowly you begin to see the problems of India. Your mind begins to see the myths of the country you have been brought up in and other ways in which the intelligence cheats itself. Then your mind stops cheating you and you see the reality of the situation because you no longer react. “To react is a sign of a person who is very conditioned.”

You can be conditioned by many things, for example, religion. The religions of today are not based in reality, but on money-orientation or power-orientation. That is why the religions are always fighting amongst themselves. Those who are born into a particular religion are conditioned to believe that their religion is exclusive, and to fight for that religion. “They have no religion within, that is working out in their lives.”

There are some people who can use the mind, although it is artificial. “In modern times we are using so many artificial things and this artificiality can creep into everything, like plastic.” Hitler used his mind to penetrate into the minds of others. The mind, which is just a bubble, “is so limited that it cannot comprehend the beauty, the glory, the expanse of reality.” The mind is a collection of garbage which you have to deny. You have to tell yourself to go beyond it. Your mind has done you no good. Your mind has been controlling you the way your watch or computer does.

“So we have to be careful that we are the ones who have created this mind and this mind has no business to control us.” Many people try to control their minds, but the only way they can do this is by again using the mind, either through ego or conditionings. There is no way for us to control our own minds, even though we think we can. We have to go beyond the mind through Kundalini awakening. The Kundalini takes us out “into the realm of reality. The Yoga takes place between your brain, I should say, your heart, with this all pervading power. She is the one which connects, She’s the one who does it.”

“Many people are doing Sahaja Yoga, I know that, but it’s difficult for them sometimes to get to meditation, to establish this thoughtless awareness which is an extremely important state which you all should achieve. So many Sahaja Yogis are there, and I’m happy to know that they are getting deeper and deeper, but as long as they are in the turmoil of their mind, they cannot progress. Whatever is created out of their mind has no reality in it, is very limited, and is also sometimes very repulsive.” For example, if you are elected governor, you think you can do whatever you want because you are the governor. The mind cannot tell the difference between being elected a governor and being a governor. So you start behaving in ways which are inappropriate. Leaders start to think, “Ah, I’m a leader.” But leadership in Sahaja Yoga is a myth. Once you become a leader, your mind becomes full of thoughts of how to dominate and control. It is only the mind which wants to control others. “If you are a real Sahaja Yogi, there is no need to control, there is no need to manoeuvre, to manipulate.”

When your mind goes beyond thoughts, then the manipulation of the attention becomes very important. Through your attention, you will become dynamic, effective, knowledgeable. You will shed light on any issue, person, or problem where you put your attention. You say, “Mother, there have been lots of miracles with your attention.” This is true, but also your attention can do many things which normal people cannot do. Through Sahaja Yoga your attention is purified, and then it is used by the Divine to manifest its powers.

When people first come to Sahaja Yoga, they send letters complaining about their parents, their health, all their problems. Because at that stage, they are still reacting and don’t know what to do. They feel that coming to Sahaja Yoga is like a contract to get all their problems solved in exchange. This is not how a Sahaja Yogi behaves.

A Sahaja Yogi is a Gurutatasta. Tatasta means the one who is standing on the shore, watching. This is the state you have to be in. This does not mean that you are not effective in the world; you become extremely effective. “Wars can stop, peace can spread, people who are evil will be exposed.”

“Because it is such an en-masse working out of Sahaja Yoga, Sahaja Yogis should not, in any way, find themselves in conflict with each other.” Still people criticize their leaders or other Sahaja Yogis, while they themselves have problems. Once you go beyond the mind, you automatically become introspective, and begin to see what is wrong with yourself and with your mind. So stand before the mirror or close your eyes, and say, “Now, Mr. Mind, what are you doing? What are you up to?” Once you step outside the mind, you can control it.

“I am happy you are celebrating My birthday. I’m supposed to be quite old, though I don’t think like that because I don’t think.” If you think about yourself all the time, or think about things which do not concern you, this puts your mind in a turmoil. This is very dangerous these days.

“To stop your thought, first of all, I think in Sahaja Yoga you should stop reading anything.” Because when you read, you collect thoughts from the books. People’s minds can be nothing but thoughts and quotations of others, and have no sense of self. They are lost. “When I was writing this book… they were saying… ‘Plato said like this and Rousseau said like that….’ Why should I refer to them?… Whatever I have witnessed in My life I should write it clearly, without thinking about what others have to say.”

To the mind, whatever is written in black and white becomes a bible, and whatever was done in the past is considered great. In the Gita there was no mention of Kundalini, so people think it is not important. But Shri Krishna didn’t write the Gita and Christ didn’t write the Bible so don’t dwell on what they might have said. Instead, you should concentrate on the one thing they have all said—that you have to be born again, that you have to go beyond the mind. Why not do that, and then see for yourself instead of staying lost with old identifications?

When Christians come to Sahaja Yoga, they still want to hear about Christ. Hindus want to hear of Rama or Krishna, Muslims about Mohammed or Fatima. From childhood they have been conditioned that they are Christian so they believe it, and it becomes very difficult to get out of it. But you could have been born into any religion. So these conditionings have taken away your freedom. Even as yogis, you still have conditionings that certain things are either good or bad. “I talked on Christ in Pune, so they said, ‘She is trying to convert everybody to Christianity,’ and when I was talking about Shri Krishna in London they said, ‘She is making everybody a Hindu.'” This is not to say that you should lose your faith in all of these great people, but first your mind should be free from the injections that are put into your head so that you can see the point and enjoy.

Sahaja Yoga gives you complete freedom and also a complete sense of freedom so that you can respect the freedom of others. “You understand what freedom is. Sahaja Yoga should work out in such a manner that you should get rid of all these conditionings that you have had.”

Our second enemy, Mr. Ego, is another headache. Ego works very fast in countries where the ego has already been bloated. Once a balloon has been inflated, it is very easy to inflate again. It is only the first time that it is very difficult, that we have to stretch it before blowing it up. “Ego comes to us from different, different angles and… from the deformity of our chakra.”

We are living in a very money-oriented world, so some people think money is very important. They feel that, “if we don’t get money, what’s the use of being in Sahaja Yoga?” But money makes us fools. In countries where people have the most money, such as Switzerland and Scandinavia, the suicide rates are the highest. Money cannot bring happiness. If the desire for money, money, money enters our heads then we cannot be Sahaja Yogis.

“Money is there just for you to use it to express your love.” When we are in thoughtless awareness, we will only want to buy things that give joy and beauty. Our generosity will guide our attention to things which will give happiness to others. Such things need not be expensive. Through our gifts we can express our love, gratitude, and shraddha (devotion with humility). Seekers give so much money to false gurus because they want to satisfy their shraddha.

In modern times, the worst thing of ego is money. Those who are rich feel that they must meet Mother separately, but such people are useless. They come and complain about their losses in business, or they say, “Mother, we have recovered because of Your blessings.” Maybe, but it is stupid. Lao Tse has described going down the Yangtse River. On either side there is much beauty, but the point is to stay on the boat and reach the ocean.

So the mind diverts our attention to wrong things, we waste our energy and ultimately become unhappy because wants are not satiable. “It’s the love that you give and the love that you receive, which is not a love which is entangled into anything with any purpose, with any idea, but just to feel that love, pure love within yourself and within others is the greatest gift of the Divine. All other things are useless, you’ll find…. That want which is satisfying, is this pure love, genuine love that you feel for others and others feel for you.”

The ego is conditioned in many ways. In India, dominating the wife is a common expression of ego. “If you try to dominate another person you can never be joyous. It is only through loving and affection and care that you can feel joy because joy has these symptoms: joy is not domination, or demanding, or asking.” Where the men dominate or insult their wives, the women become dominating. Every action has a reaction. But the reaction also is wrong and “this reaction should be just dissolved into the feeling of pure love, the ocean of compassion.”

There are many beggars on the streets of Delhi. Maybe they are cheats, but many people with money are cheats as well. “But the compassion is built within Me… that… let Me organize some sort of a place where all these people who are orphans can be given all the help, and maybe from this world of misery and poverty you might get lots of lotuses coming out. But the feeling has to be collective. We can solve problems in this way, but this doesn’t mean becoming like other social workers who are only pampering their egos. There is nothing deep in their attention in looking after the people whose problems they are trying to solve. With a great feeling of love and compassion we can do it…. One of My desires is this. If it is a desire of you all, it will work out.”

These people are also human beings and we have to look after them. But do not think, “I will be the treasurer. I will be the president.” All these clergyships should go away from the mind itself. Otherwise you are not free. A person with ego behaves like a drunkard or a lunatic. You need to approach them with a barge pole because they might jump on you like a leopard. Yet some people like this get awards for peace.

“The peace is within ourselves and this peace has to be retained and introspected and seen. Are we peaceful or are we reacting?” If you react, then you are not at peace. Face yourself and see for yourself. “If you are peaceful then this peace will spread all over. It will help others, it will give them physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual peace.”

“So you people have a great responsibility of coming to Sahaja Yoga. It is not just a certificate or My badge that you are a Sahaja Yogi.” Women should also see to this point “because they are mostly worried about their children, about their husband’s jobs, and things like that but they are not worried about others, about people who are around them. So they have to also take to a Sahaja style of life in which they expand their love, expand their attention to other people and see how they can please others.”

In the West there is no understanding that you can give something out of love, without expecting anything in return. They cannot understand that someone wants to express love. We should get rid of these stupid ideas that we can control others by giving them things, or giving them promises. “We have to control ourselves, and that control can come if you do not allow your mind to control it. That control is complete freedom.”

“If you are a perfect Sahaja Yogi, then you will have no problems in dealing with any problem, with any circumstances, with any person, whatsoever.”

Don’t be afraid that if you work for Sahaja Yoga, your ego will bloat more. “It is not so… You are working for love. Such an ocean of love is within you.” You cannot do without this love, and this love will work out at every level—your family, your city, your country, the whole world. “This is the new generation we have to create of people who believe in love which is truth…. Without love you cannot have truth because when you love somebody, you know everything about that person. In the same way when you love your country you know everything about that country. But first you must love.”

“People are now having problems because they don’t love their country. If you love your country, you will know what is the essence of your country… what it is going through. And that intense feeling of oneness itself will work out because after all, you are connected to the Divine. With intensity you should feel for all these things that are really so destructive and troublesome in these modern times.”

“I again want to thank you for celebrating this birthday and for all the sweetness you have showered upon Me. You are just like these beautiful flowers for Me which are anxious all the time to make you happy, to please you. Just like that I find you before Me, beautiful flowers fragrant with Divinity. I hope you all will understand your own value and work it out. May God bless you.”

Birthday Puja Seminar 1996
For those who have not been to the Scout Camp before, it’s a wonderful place for a seminar. It is situated in the heart of Delhi, amidst all the activity found in a big city, but once inside the camp, you feel you are out in the nature. It is a quiet, sandy camp, with trees and nature all around. The yogis stay in little rounded huts. The love and care we felt from our New Delhi brothers and sisters was incredible. On a mundane level, the accommodations were fantastic and the food from the Sahaj caterers was superb. We all felt so pampered and spoiled!

As a parent bringing a child to Dharamsala for the first time, what struck me was how many other parents were there. It was like a big family reunion. In the daytime while the children met their friends and escaped for the majority of the day to play, we enjoyed the beautiful sunshine, and kept busy greeting old friends, registering for the seminar, and queuing up at the various stalls to purchase books, cassettes, ayurvedic medicines and other items which are hard to find in the West. Programs were going on throughout the day. Most yogis seemed to wander at will, chatting, shopping, sleeping, singing, bathing, and of course, meditating! as the spirit guided them. Most of us were there only three days, but it felt like time expanded to allow us to work out whatever was necessary. Many were agreed in feeling that, all right, now we’ve cleared out a bit, let’s start a full India Tour!

Birthday celebrations in Delhi began on March 19th with an evening of beautiful bhajans and entertainment. It was hard to believe that only four days before, we were still in our countries. All memories of home melted away as we immersed ourselves in the pure enjoyment of beholding our Beloved Mother, and being in the company of thousands of saints. The pendal was beautifully decorated and showed such love.

That night, mostly Indian Sahaja Yogis performed some new songs and some old. Shri Mataji arrived late in the evening, and after She came, there was a play written by Yogi Mahajan and performed by the Delhi Yuva Shakti. This charming and amusing play was about seekers encountering false gurus, rejecting the false gurus’ ridiculous antics, and eventually finding the Lotus Feet of the Divine. At the end, even all of the gurus came to the Lotus Feet of the Divine, and all actors and actresses, gurus and seekers, bowed to Shri Mataji’s Lotus Feet. It was in Hindi, but Westerners could understand some of the skits.

The music program ended when Shri Mataji left at about 1:30 am, and as usual, hundreds of yogis lingered on, enjoying the vibrations and meeting one another. We all indulged in that joyous feeling of meeting a brother or sister from another country we might have not seen for some time, perhaps recently married, or with a new baby, or bearing some other joyful news. Slowly the crowds dissipated and yogis made their ways home or back to the camp for a blissful night’s rest.

The evening of March 20th brought more lovely music. That night’s very special features were performances by musicians from the Nagpur Academy. There were instrumental and vocal performances, and all were excellent. One memorable highlight was a western Sahaja Yogini’s rendition of Brahma Shodile. Her tune and rhythm was perfect, and the pronunciation was impeccable. It was unforgettable. The Nagpur Academy’s success was shining!

Shri Mataji arrived during these performances, and shortly followed a vocalist from Lucknow, named Kishor Chaturvedi who had performed in Ganapatipule for the first time last December to the delight of all present. He brought a full band with him, and he sang Hindi bhajans for an hour or more. He had written some especially for Shri Mataji, and he sang many Kabirji bhajans as well. One special bhajan he sang was called Chuk Chuk Chuk Chuk Train Chali hai Jeevan ki. In Hindi, the chorus means, “The train of life is moving.” He compared a train’s journey to life. One clever verse said that, “from here we have to go to heaven, and we have to be sure about what we have booked for ourselves along the way,” referring to our karmas. He sang that “from our lives, we have to reach the destination Nirmal Nagari (Heaven).” Even those who could not understand Hindi got the general idea, and everyone enjoyed this bhajan thoroughly. After his performance, there were qawals from Delhi. Nirmal Sangit Sarita was there on the stage for the entire evening, giving instrumental support.

At midnight, we all sang Happy Birthday to Shri Mataji. Then a wonderful surprise came! There were many of us who did not know that Sir C.P. Srivastava’s birthday is also March 21st. We sang Happy Birthday to Sir C.P. as well.

The next evening, March 21st, was puja. All yogis sat quietly in meditation before Shri Mataji’s arrival. Shri Mataji’s talk seemed very short but very powerful, as She spoke about going beyond the trappings of the mind and into thoughtless awareness. (Copies of the talk were available the next morning! See the synopsis in this issue.) During the puja, one feels as if nothing else is real, except for Shri Mataji and all the yogis. Savoring the joy, we prayed that we might hold on to that feeling for a while.

The meaning of the entire seminar seemed to coalesce in the moment when we again sang Happy Birthday to Shri Mataji. It gave a feeling of celebrating Her incarnation, all Her work of spreading Sahaja Yoga throughout the world, and giving second birth to all Her children in a stronger and more direct way than at any puja I had so far attended. The joy of singing Happy Birthday to Shri Mataji in person is indescribable, and the song was as though transformed into the deepest Sanskrit shloka praising the Devi. It felt like a fulfillment of all our years as Sahaja Yogis. There was a large cake pulled on a cart by the children in costumes of various Gods and Goddesses. It seemed that nearly everyone there had brought flowers or presents of every size and description.

After the puja, back in the bungalows, everyone was very animated—laughing and talking as if they had been intoxicated with the most wonderful love and vibrations from our loving Mother. The next afternoon, those going up to the school (5 buses, including children) had a taste of that India tour feeling of drifting (and bouncing) about the countryside in meditation and in the joy and security of collectivity. Only these were luxury buses we were riding on, an entirely different proposition from the old tour buses in Maharashtra!

Arrangements were made for those who wanted to stay on at the camp. Spontaneously groups of yogis formed, chatted and gradually a circle enlarged as we asked questions of each other and got to know more about different parts of the globe. There were so many tender moments this evening, as gifts were exchanged among yogis. Suddenly there was music, the most beautiful bhajans, with a German yogini on dholak, another person on guitar, and an amazing Russian opera singer. As the rest of us knew the songs we sang along, but when our Russian sister sang Ave Maria, we were all completely thoughtless and in awe of such rare beauty of voice. The next thing we knew, tea was being served to each of us by the caterers with that quality of love and caring, performed with big smiles on their faces.

As one writes, vibrations fill the atmosphere and one can re-live the feeling of being there, in that intensity, and then wonder why we would want to be anywhere else.

—Amy Ahluwalia and Ursula Doring, USA

Sahasrara Day Puja Talk Synopsis
May 5, 1996, Cabella, Italy

“Today we are celebrating the opening of the Sahasrara…. I must say it was a great happening that took place for all the humanity.” Without self-realization no one would have been able to understand anything about Sahasrara. The scriptures contain descriptions of Sahasrara, but they are very ambiguous and people could not have understood that there is a realm beyond Sahasrara where reality is. “That time, what I saw around Me I felt was all darkness, and unless and until there are many lights, people will never realize how important it is to have lights.”

Christ, Mohammed Sahib, Rama and Krishna were all adored, but they were seen as Divine personalities, and as being very far away from human personalities. Those who worshipped them were not able to follow their teachings or behaviour. Human movement runs on parallel lines with the Divine, and these lines do not meet unless a person gets self-realization. Human beings move on one plane of existence. They have to come to a higher plane to understand that what they know is not reality.

All kinds of people come to Sahaja Yoga. They may be described as cruel, licentious, or cheats, and the yogis feel they are horrible. “But I’ve seen that every human being is as if made of the same character as far as the spirit is concerned.” People many look different, talk differently, or their styles may be different, “but inside they are all very beautiful. And this I found out, one after another. You don’t know how much it was giving Me joy, not only joy but also encouragement, support, and patience. And then now, you see, how Sahaja Yoga has grown.”

The greatest thing that has happened is that Sahaja Yogis feel very responsible about Sahaja Yoga. It is now their innate desire to spread this enlightenment everywhere. First they wanted to become the Spirit; even people who didn’t actually seek their spirit have become yogis. Some people were never expected to go so far.

One thing you realized when you came into the realm of reality is that you are definitely connected with the Divine. Some had very strong experiences, others had very mild experiences, but almost all have started believing in, understanding and having confidence in themselves. “Because there are so many myths about God, religion, gurus, that when they saw the light of the spirit, which gave them a sense of reality, it was as if they steadied their minds, they steadied themselves.” But from the human level to this spiritual level, in the process of becoming, some things still linger on which have to be cleansed, brightened, absolutely enlightened.

The great thing about Sahaja Yoga is that you yourself did all that. You are the light. Unless and until these lights are attended to and given the oil of love, how can they go on burning? Somehow you realized the importance of becoming good Sahaja Yogis, whether through introspection, through other yogis talking about it or through your own understanding.

“Complete emancipation of this earth, of this globe, I’m sure will take place if you people all take up the responsibility.” Responsibility has certain problems. First you must know you are not in charge. Second, you must know you are not alone. There are so many angels and ganas with you. To think you are doing anything will make you egoistical. It is best to say, “Alright, I’m not doing anything, it is the Divine that is working it out.” You say this not because the Divine wants credit but because this will stop the balloon of ego from coming up and will make you humble. “This humility will definitely improve this great tree of spirituality within you. Definitely it will make you a very evolved personality.”

But first you must understand that you are not the doer. “It’s very important to understand when you have spiritual authority to do things. It is not a testing ground, I can tell you this much. Many people think that Mother is testing us. I’m not testing you. You are testing yourself…. You are in the beautiful garden of reality where very few have entered.” Each one of you gives a feeling of sweetness to others because you are all having the same kind of experiences of this reality. It is beyond words, but you start feeling that oneness, that nearness, that friendship. You can feel that the other person is a Sahaja Yogi. As a collective you become a completely integrated, living organism, a living organization.

You do not feel you are something separate from any Sahaja Yogi, no matter what his position in life. This integration and identification with others makes us so large, so great, so powerful. You become humble and forget all the false ideas about class or other types of consciousness. There is no duality in the personality. You are not nice some of the time and unkind other times. “Humility is only possible for people who are strong, because they don’t need any reactions, they don’t need any protection. Their humility keeps them protected also very much.”

So you begin to feel you are a small dust particle; at the same time you feel you are the whole sky. It depends on where you are, what you are doing, what you are witnessing. You develop a flexible temperament that makes you subtler; you become very penetrating and understand what is to be done. As you become great, you start feeling what you can do to help others. The subtle light of the spirit can penetrate into anything, can remain anywhere and also disappear anywhere. You don’t even use this energy. “Without your knowledge it uses you. You should not determine what you are going to do…. Whatever you have decided is alright, but if it does not materialize, there’s nothing to worry…. Everything is arranged and planned and beautifully kept for you…. If you decide something and your decision is alright, if you have to do that, it will work out. If it doesn’t work out, it should not have been worked out.”

A realized soul is not concerned about what he wants, what he likes or doesn’t like. He is satisfied with whatever he gets. You think only of your spiritual comfort. The subtle personality built into the Sahaja Yogis cannot tolerate nonsense or harshness.

You are now connected with the One who organizes nature and animals so beautifully. Trees, animals and even human beings cannot manoeuvre or understand this Divine power. But you can because you are not ordinary human beings anymore. “You have crossed the bondage and now you are not even in the Sahasrara, you are beyond it…. Now you are just like great citizens in the great realm of Divinity…. This Divine force helps you, works out everything… it guides you, it manages you. So what you have to do is to keep yourself open for the guidance. At the same time you must act because the guidance will also come from within by which you will know this is what I have to do.”

If something doesn’t work out, try to understand that is what is the best for us. It doesn’t mean you should stop desiring. Your desires are very powerful. Because you have achieved something in your ascent you receive a special blessing, a boon, that whatever you desire works out. Don’t desire anything which is not proper because that will also work out.

The Sahasrara is the limbic area. It is closed like a lotus until the Kundalini enters it and opens it out. In the Bible it says, “I will appear before you like tongues of flames.” These petals are nerves which are enlightened and look like flames but have no heat. In Sanskrit they are called “tapohina, no heat. Extremely cooling soothing, beautifully burning.”

We sometimes fail in keeping this lotus open because there are still some lingering human feelings within us. Ego and superego try to close the Sahasrara again and again. You have to be alert and find out what is closing the Sahasrara. If it is ego, it cannot be attacked because all attacks come from ego. So you have to enter into the state of Nirvichara and go into thoughtless awareness. “But the simple thing to do is very practical. Try to understand why you are being egoistical.” Ask yourself why you are angry, why do you try to dominate or control someone. The mind cannot answer. Try to understand that compared to your love and compassion, nothing is greater because the light of the Divine flows in this. If you feel hatred or anger towards someone, “just know that you have to love that person.” Your love can be measured only by your own satisfaction and happiness.

If you put your attention on a person with love, you understand that person as if you are identified with them. When you place yourself in the same position as the other person, the problem is solved. As realized souls, “you have powers of love, and identification is the only way one can understand love. This ego will immediately be sucked in as soon as you put your loving attention on that person…. When you are identified with another person, you put that person in charge of Divinity—just a feeling of oneness.”

We often have very wrong ideas about ourselves and about others. In small things also we keep our own ideas, for example about our lifestyle. When you say “I don’t like this,” you falsely identify yourself with another person’s badha. But if you identify your self with the person who has created that thing, you will enjoy it the way that person enjoyed doing it. “This criticizing nature comes from a terrible misunderstanding about oneself. Who are we to judge others and why do we waste our energy in this way? We should see what is good in others…. If you are trying to see what is wrong with others, you are not in reality. In reality, you are the witness. You do not get upset or say things that will upset others.”

The joy of the person who creates something is just bubbling through but until we are identified with that person, we might see how it could have been done better. The same could happen to us. We could do something and another says how it could have been done better. We are too great to bother about these things. We should not waste our energy which is spiritual energy on trivial things; it makes us small. We have the ability to manipulate the spiritual energy; the trees and flowers cannot do this. “Then what you will do is to create oceans of joys.”

Have you shown love, compassion, kindness? If Sahaja Yoga is not working out for you, just see what you have done in this realm of reality. “Have you enjoyed the reality? Have you felt the joy of this real love of Divine? Are you dissolved into that or you are still standing on the shores watching? You can create. You are quite capable of creating tremendous joy, tremendous happiness and peace.”

The world today is in a horrible condition—turmoil, confusion, corruption, destruction, ugliness. You can beautify it by transforming others. “But if you are not yourself a beautiful Sahaja Yogi, how can you do it?” To do this you must understand your subtleties, and also let go of the nonsense you are still identified with, certain ideas, or a type of consciousness. “These conditionings go on making a fool out of us.”

They are passed from generation to generation and are called genes. “But in Sahaja Yoga these genes can also change. So this kind of a conditioning which is lingering on still to your bodies, to your minds, to your emotions has to be seen and cleaned out because that kills the joy. That kills the full experience of reality.” You must shed all that befools you morning till evening.

The entrepreneurs take advantage of these false identifications. But we are not brainless people. Our brains are enlightened. We identify with the spirit and have the wisdom of the spirit in us so we don’t follow fashions or take to anything stupid. “In the realm of reality we have all the seven chakras absolutely enlightened, integrated and nourished.” Then we see ourselves as absolutely unlimited. We penetrate, we expand, we contract. “It is absolutely a flexible personality and a personality that creates peace, joy, harmony.”

“With the Sahasrara opening, I’m sure the whole world will be integrated. One day I will understand these problems that are facing us because of stupidity… When [this integration] takes place you will see the light of the Divine will be absolutely outshining all these darknesses or destructive forces. It is going to happen if so many Sahasraras could be opened out, then why not the Sahasrara of this world also could be opened out to truth and reality? It will… In the history of spirituality, this is a very important day. For us is to realize that we are enlightened, we are the light of joy, light of compassion, light of love—like the silent flames of the Sahasrara, in different colours, beautifully dancing. Then we’ll know what the enjoyment of reality is.”

Sahasrara Day Seminar
Cabella, May 3–May 5, 1996

Many Sahaja yogis already arrived in Cabella during the week to help prepare for Sahasrara Day seminar, which was to be held the following weekend of Friday, May 3rd through Sunday, May 5th. It was raining. One of the main tasks was to erect a big tent near the outskirts of Cabella, where the yogi-brothers would stay overnight. Also, the collective kitchen in the castle needed to be prepared for the Puja weekend.

On Friday, not surprisingly, the weather began to get better, sending sunshine into the camp. On Friday evening most yogis had arrived. There was no evening program. We had a late dinner.

By Saturday, more than 1,200 yogis had reached Cabella. The organization of the seminar was running smoothly. On Saturday afternoon, a havan was performed in the big Puja hall. With all our hearts we offered to Shri Agni all negativity against the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to our Holy Mother.

In the evening there was the cultural program performed by the hosting countries, which were Greece, Israel, Germany, Slovakia, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Austria. Some of these countries were dancing traditional folkloric dances which were a very colourful and beautiful display of varying rhythms. Some of the Rome school children were performing a dance for H.H. Shri Mataji. As part of a play, one yogini, dressed as the empress Maria Theresia, (an incarnation of Shri Raja Lakshmi) came on stage and was watching a cultural program of her time, showing how ridiculous many customs of society in those days were and how she, with patience, foresight and deed, changed them. Also Mozart met her when he was still a child (a little yogi boy pretended to play the violin). The empress had 16 children.

After some more folk dancing, a lively chorus rendering Happy Day made us clap and sing. While the chorus was on stage, all of a sudden an Arab raced across the stage followed by a screaming Israeli soldier waving a machine gun. Only a few minutes later the Israeli soldier was chased by the Arab across the stage, which was to show that violence only begets violence. We were amused for just a moment, but gave bandhans afterwards for Israel and its neighbouring countries.

Then another play was performed in which Shri Brahma, Shri Vishnu, Shri Shiva and Shri Ganesha were talking to each other trying to find a way to help mankind out of its desperate state of self-destruction. Finally they realized that only one person would be able to accomplish this difficult task. They turned to Shri Adi Shakti for help. While the yogis were performing, all of a sudden the electricity went out. The play was continued for a short while, with the help of many flashlights directed at the stage, but had to be discontinued since the special effects were not available. Shri Mataji suggested that we sing some Noida bhajans. We did so and after about 15 minutes the lights came on again.

Another play with a slide-show was presented by our German brothers and sisters depicting with beautiful lyrics and pictures how the world (full of Sahaja Yogis) will have deepened in spirituality and all aspects of life, in the future, using the theme of Starship Enterprise—Departure into a new dimension! Thus the Saturday evening program ended.

The Sahasrara Puja was performed on Sunday, May 5th at about 4 p.m. We had puja weather (not too cold, not too hot after a slight drizzle to cool us down). Shri Mataji told us that the opening of Sahasrara was a great happening for all of humanity because without Self-Realization it would have been impossible for Her to talk to people. She also said that we have become very responsible Sahaja Yogis and we all try to be good Sahaja Yogis, going beyond our smallness, becoming identified with other yogis and thus becoming large-hearted and also humble at the same time. After the Puja, presents from all countries were offered to H.H. Shri Mataji.

On Monday, the day after Puja, H.H. Shri Mataji told some yogis that all vibrations had been absorbed by the yogis during Puja and that She felt very light after the Puja. She also said that all Sahaja Yogis had been in Nirvikalpa Samadhi at least for some time during the Puja!!! Our Holy Mother also said that She was very satisfied with us.

—Much, much love, The Austrian collective

108 Thank You’s to Shri Mataji
The following are the 108 “Thank You’s” to our Divine Mother Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi offered at this year’s Sahasrara Puja. They have been composed out of deep love and eternal gratitude and can be recited at occasions of prayer and worship. They are meant to express what is beyond expression.

Thank You for descending from Your heavenly abode Mata Dwipa to bring light into the darkness of Kali Yuga.
Thank You for delivering Sahaja Yoga to a confused and self-destructive humanity.
Thank You for revealing the meaning of creation and evolution to us.
Thank You for revealing the actual existence of God to us.
Thank You for giving divine meaning to human life.
Thank You for revealing the reflection of the Vishwarupa within the human body to us.
Thank You for revealing primordial principles of creation to us.
Thank You for revealing the reality of human nature to us.
Thank You for revealing the meaning of true religion to us.
Thank You for teaching the Divine Knowledge of Sahaja Yoga to us.
Thank You for fulfilling the promise of Jesus Christ.
Thank You for lifting the veil of illusion for us.
Thank You for revealing the true meaning of good and evil to us.
Thank You for awakening Mother Kundalini in us.
Thank You for opening the dimension of collective consciousness to us.
Thank You for giving us self realization.
Thank You for establishing vibratory awareness on our central nervous system.
Thank You for nourishing us with the all pervading power of God.
Thank You for revealing the meaning of the “last judgement” to us.
Thank You for resurrecting the tree of life from its slumber of joyful anticipation.
Thank You for crowning the work of all avatars and prophets.
Thank You for fulfilling the dreams of all saints and seekers.
Thank You for giving meaning to all those who have sacrificed their lives for the emancipation of mankind.
Thank You for re-establishing hope, belief and confidence in our hearts.
Thank You for lifting human self-determination beyond the concept of race, caste system and religion.
Thank You for giving divine meaning to the idea of freedom, equality and brotherhood.
Thank You for uniting mankind at the feet of one God, one experience and one truth.
Thank You for inviting mankind into the realms of the Absolute.
Thank You for liberating us from the illusion of a dualistic world.
Thank You for liberating us from ignorance, confusion and solitude.
Thank You for exposing the demonic forces of the materialistic world.
Thank You for exposing the inefficiency of linear thinking.
Thank You for exposing the cruelty and danger of patriarchal politics.
Thank You for destroying enslaving personal and social patterns and conditionings.
Thank You for liberating humanity from the suffocating chains of the Catholic Church.
Thank You for liberating humanity from the abuse of religious authority by the Islamic governments.
Thank You for revealing the falsehood of fake gurus and all religious institutions to us.
Thank You for liberating humanity from blind faith and superficial religious conditionings.
Thank You for exposing the limitations and shortcomings of a scientific approach to reality.
Thank You for destroying the illusions of the Western value system.
Thank You for introducing us to a relationship with the Divine.
Thank You for finding us worthy.
Thank You for letting us participate in the salvation of mankind.
Thank You for giving us the joy of introducing a yearning seeker to your redeeming motherly love.
Thank You for inviting all of us to the court of the Goddess.
Thank You for establishing the Kingdom of God on earth.
Thank You for accepting our offers and prayers.
Thank You for showering Your blessings endlessly on us.
Thank You for opening the gateway to heaven within us.
Thank You for bestowing the gift of yoga onto us.
Thank You for making us.
Thank You for baptising us.
Thank You for healing us.
Thank You for purifying us.
Thank You for cleansing us.
Thank You for transforming us.
Thank You for enlightening us.
Thank You for nourishing us.
Thank You for elating us.
Thank You for being with us.
Thank You for loving us.
Thank You for forgiving us.
Thank You for helping us.
Thank You for protecting us.
Thank You for encouraging us.
Thank You for guiding us.
Thank You for comforting us.
Thank You for counselling us.
Thank You for correcting us.
Thank You for never abandoning us.
Thank You for saving us.
Thank You for gathering us.
Thank You for teaching us.
Thank You for opening our hearts.
Thank You for caring for us.
Thank You for accommodating us.
Thank You for trusting us.
Thank You for counting on us.
Thank You for waiting for us.
Thank You for taking us into your Divine body.
Thank You for giving us collectivity.
Thank You for giving us friendship.
Thank You for giving us families.
Thank You for giving us positions in life.
Thank You for giving us wealth.
Thank You for giving us spiritual authority.
Thank You for giving us self-esteem.
Thank You for giving us discrimination.
Thank You for giving us wisdom.
Thank You for giving us success.
Thank You for giving us meditation.
Thank You for giving us inner peace.
Thank You for giving us inner joy.
Thank You for giving us enlightened attention.
Thank You for giving us detachment.
Thank You for equipping us with divine weapons.
Thank You for submitting us to the benevolent attention of the Deities and all celestial beings.
Thank You for giving us concern for others.
Thank You for giving us the power to help others.
Thank You for giving us the satisfaction of spreading Vishwa Nirmala Dharma.
Thank You for Your continuous attention.
Thank You for being the mirror.
Thank You for being ever present.
Thank You for being gentle.
Thank You for being wonderful.
Thank You for being in our heart.
Thank You for being our Guru.
Thank You for being our Mother.
Thank You for ever and ever and ever!

Our Place in the Virata: Holland
Shri Mataji has often indicated that countries have certain qualities or have to work out particular things within the Great Divine Being, the Virata. We know that France is the liver, England the Heart, Australia the Mooladhara, and so forth. However, our knowledge of the more subtle qualities and aspects, especially of smaller countries, is perhaps rather limited. In this new feature in the Divine Cool Breeze, all countries will present themselves one by one, giving an overview of what Shri Mataji has said about the specific qualities and the subtle role the country plays in the Virata. This not only gives us a chance to discover more about each other, it also gives us a better idea about the working and the principles that are active in the Virata itself. This is the second installment of this series.
A Brief History and Outline
Holland is a small country tucked away in the northwestern part of Europe, with Belgium and Germany as its neighbours. It measures about 350 by 200 km and has some 15 million inhabitants. The country’s official name is the Netherlands. The national religion is Protestantism. The Catholic Church does not have such a strong grip on society as it has in other European countries. As the Protestant religion tends to be a bit “mental” or dry, sometimes this is reflected in the nature of Dutch people. The Dutch are known for their tolerance and their sense of equality. From the Sahaja point of view, these tendencies lead to excess here and there.
Shri Mataji visited Holland for the first time in 1965 as the wife of a UN diplomat. Sahaja Yoga started on July 3, 1985 when Shri Mataji gave a public program in The Hague. Thereafter Shri Mataji has visited Holland another seven times, mostly to Amsterdam. The growth of the Dutch collectivity is “slow but steady.” There are about 60 Sahaja Yogis plus 30 children spread out in about four different centres, of which Amsterdam is the largest.
Shri Mataji on Holland
On a few occasions Shri Mataji has spoken about the nature and qualities of the country. During Her first visit in 1985 Shri Mataji granted a Trigunatmika Puja to be performed to Her. On that occasion She said, “Holland is the holy land of Europe.” She explained that in Holland the relationship between the Earth (the Mother) and the water (the sea, the Guru) is very significant. As you may know, a large part of Holland is below sea-level. It is protected from the sea by dunes and dams, and geographically speaking there are a number of very large bays through which the sea penetrates deep into the country.
Referring to this situation, Shri Mataji said, “The sea cleanses and the Mother Earth blesses the people of Holland…. The Mother Earth has allowed the sea to flow in, the sea has taken refuge in the Mother. The Guru has bound itself with the Motherly qualities.” She added that the Earth contains the sea and it is therefore always greater then the sea. Therefore Holland “is a special place where the Guru has surrendered to the Mother.” Shri Mataji added that to be holy means that we must allow the Guru Tattwa to be controlled, guided and beautified by the Mother principle. By taking to the motherly qualities and “binding our guru principle through the motherly and beautiful creative power, our presence becomes very agreeable.” During the Puja Shri Mataji also spoke in detail about the division of labour and solutions for unemployment.
During a visit in 1986, Shri Mataji explained that Holland and Belgium are related to each other in the play of the Virata. Both countries are part of the left Nabhi. Whereas Belgium stands for world peace, Holland stands for justice. These two qualities are interdependent and cannot do without each other. Wherever there is injustice there cannot be peace. Also in countries where there is no peace, the principle of justice is challenged and corrupted. The principle of justice is manifested in the presence of the International High Court of Justice in The Hague. Shri Mataji also explained that unfortunately the laws in Holland are very crooked and anti-divine. A lot of things in Holland are tolerated or legal, sometimes to the dismay of neighbouring countries. The Dutch drug policy is a well known example of this.
Being in a country which represents the left Nabhi, Shri Mataji explained in great detail how wives have to be good housewives. There are many forms of Shri Lakshmi, and the housewife is the most powerful manifestation of them. The left Nabhi is governed by the spleen and the pancreas. As the spleen is the speedometer, it is important to have a proper timing and rhythm in life. Therefore, the housewife regulates the rhythm of her husband’s life, creating the right mood by not discussing troublesome affairs that might be upsetting, especially in the morning. She will create a state of peace in the household by bearing and absorbing all problems, just like the Mother Earth. She is a very mature person who sees the uselessness of arguments. She is so powerful that the only thing she does is to give. This gives her so much joy that she derives all her energy from that.
Holland is famous for its flowers. Each springtime, very large areas are set ablaze with magnificent colours when field after field of flowers are blooming. One day someone asked Shri Mataji how it is that in spite of momentous negativities the country has not yet had its deluge or sunk into the seas. Shri Mataji smilingly answered, “Because Holland is producing the flowers for the Adi Shakti and you know that She is very fond of flowers.”
The Work We Have To Do Today
The main work of Sahaja Yogis today is on the level of fighting the “freedom idea” and developing a sense of righteousness, of what is right and what is wrong. In 1990 Shri Mataji explained that the sense of freedom maintained by the Dutch (the “what’s wrong attitude”) is prevalent to the same extent as in the USA. On one hand, the Dutch are very tolerant. For instance, differences between people are appreciated and there are no real racial problems, although it is a very multicultural place. On the other hand, tolerance has gone to the extent that totally absurd situations are accepted as “normal.” This expresses itself particularly in the laws of Holland and in the way these laws are executed. The task of Sahaja Yogis is to become aware of these absurdities, to fight the degeneration of morality, and to expose untruth wherever it is possible.
— Henno de Graaf, Holland

Looking a Little Bit into Heaven
An Enchanted Visit to Nepal
In April we went to Nepal from Austria with the hope that soon Shri Mataji would be visiting and giving a public program. The first part of our visit was spent exploring Kathmandu which has many interesting attractions, but most notable for Sahaja Yogis is that it is the home of seven swayambhus with very strong vibrations. Our sightseeing included a tour of the swayambhus, as well as wonderful wood houses and museums.
First we walked to the huge stone building of Shri Bhairava. This building is situated just opposite the Nepalese prison. Because of its position they used Shri Bhairava as a kind of lie detector. All the trials happened in front of the swayambhu. The defendant had to touch the feet of Shri Bhairava and to swear that he had or had not done the criminal act. Everyone knew that Shri Bhairava was going to kill liars so all the defendants spoke the truth, because they had too much fear of divine revenge. For anyone looking at Shri Bhairava with left vishuddhi, the fear was understandable. Fortunately, we didn’t so we could enjoy the vibrations and look into Shri Bhairava’s eyes, which were full of love and purity.
The next day, we drove with the local bus to the Buddhist monastery, Swayambunath. This is the most well known attraction in Nepal. We could feel strong vibrations when we looked at the swayambhu stupa. The Tibetan monks and the many tourists also had strong vibrations, but not good ones. Looking at the stupa, you became thoughtless.
We took a riksha to Patan, the second biggest town in the Kathmandu valley. Here there was a small temple, the Buddha swayambhu. Tremendous love streamed out of this. Our hearts opened immediately. The people living in the temple looked at each other in astonishment as they saw us with tears in our eyes, joyful expressions on our faces and open hands held out towards Shri Buddha. We didn’t mind their astonishment and after some time were invited to stand closer to the golden statue. It was very difficult to leave such vibrations, but to quote Baba Mama, “All good things must come to an end.”
The next day we visited the fourth swayambhu of Sleeping Vishnu. The black stone statue was in the middle of a water basin and around the basin there was a lattice work fence to protect Shri Vishnu. Only Hindus are allowed behind the fence to touch Shri Vishnu’s feet. We pressed our faces between the lattice work and got a view of the swayambhu. The black stone building was lying very graciously in the big pool. In his four hands, Shri Vishnu was holding His weapons and you got the impression that He could wake up every second to kill the demons. His vibrations are so peaceful and full of power and strength.
Two days later we received a telephone call confirming the visit of Shri Mataji to Nepal from April 15 – 17. The joyous news was passed on and preparations began. We washed the curtains, cleaned the carpets, painted the house from inside out, polished the furniture, organized the printing of posters and advertising for the newspaper and television, etc., etc. One week before Shri Mataji’s visit, we received a fax saying that She would prefer to stay in a hotel.
Our first reaction was disappointment. Then we realized that Sahaja Yoga is now also known in the royal family of Nepal. If they wanted to visit Shri Mataji, they would prefer to do so in a neutral place like a hotel. With this hope in our hearts we started looking for a beautiful suite. We found exactly the right thing at the Holiday Inn Crown Plaza Hotel. Two years ago there was a meeting for the seven prime ministers of S.A.R.C. (South Asian Regional Cooperatives) in Kathmandu. The Holiday Inn built a separate house with eight suites, one for each minister with the biggest and most beautiful for the king. It was this one that we rented for Shri Mataji.
Now we will explain how the knowledge of Sahaja Yoga entered into the royal family. Once upon a time there was a little girl with the name of Ambika. She lost her parents when she was very young and one lady relative adopted her. This lady was also the queen of the country. As she grew older, Ambika, the little adopted princess, became sick and moody. One day she met a lady who told her about Sahaja Yoga. Ambika got her realization, meditated regularly and recovered from her sickness and moodiness. Soon the family became curious and after some time, all came to either receive realization or to know about Sahaja Yoga.
The day of Shri Mataji’s arrival came. We all woke up early and went to the hotel to make final preparations. As everyone left for the airport to greet Shri Mataji, some stayed back for Her arrival at the hotel. The cooking crew, consisting of two cooks and one assistant, arrived. They filled the fridge with the most delicious food you can ever imagine.
Shri Mataji arrived, filling the place with vibrations. We performed aarti, after which She walked to Her room. She was very happy with the suite and praised the wood-carving columns, statues and huge beautiful thankas. She also enjoyed the 16 different specialties from the Nepali and European kitchen which were served for lunch. During conversation, Shri Mataji asked about the food and was told that a lot of the ingredients had come from Austria and Germany, but that the production and making of the food had been done in Nepal. Suddenly the subject of Germany came up. She said that Hitler had changed the brains of the people and that Germany should, like Czechoslovakia, again become two countries because the people from the east part were good for nothing. After dinner Shri Mataji retired to Her room to rest.
The next morning after breakfast, Shri Mataji called the ladies into Her bedroom. She gave everyone a wonderful cotton sari and explained to one that her sari had special stitching from Hyderabad. After this She went shopping to Patan. She liked the Nepalese wood crafting very much and ordered some different furnishings and whole doors for Her houses in Cabella and India. On Her return to the hotel she ate lunch and then rested before leaving for the public program.
We drove to the open theatre where the program was to be held. Already 3,000 people were waiting. The stage had been beautifully decorated by the yogis, and the national TV was on stand by to make a recording for the news. As we entered the musicians from Noida were singing bhajans.
By the time Shri Mataji arrived, there were about 6,000 people. They all got realization by stretching out their hands toward Shri Mataji. Most of them could feel the cool breeze. The crowd was very joyful and Shri Mataji had Her full attention on the people as She worked on them. It was very powerful and very concentrated. All the power of the universe was working and we all felt completely covered with that. We were all perfect witnesses of the whole divine play. One felt peace and silence inside and love for everyone. It was one of those strong experiences that are, unfortunately, too short. I recalled that Lisa, who was the leader of Nepal for 14 years and recently passed away, once called it, “Looking a little bit into heaven.” She also commented that when everything works out, we will be like this. It gave a very strong desire for everything to work out very fast, as the rewards would be fantastic.
After some time, Shri Mataji left the open theatre and drove back to the hotel. A little later, some royal guests arrived. The mother of the king came with her sister and the sister’s daughter-in-law. Shri Mataji worked for one hour on the queen’s mother. She had suffered back pain for many years and was only able to walk with a stick. Shri Mataji recommended some treatments. She thanked Shri Mataji in a very humble way, and was actually able to walk some steps without her stick. As she left, we were all desiring that the next person would be the king himself. Shri Mataji slept around 4:00 a.m.
The next day after breakfast She talked a long time to Herbert and Ramkrishna. They gave Her a flower bouquet for Mother’s Day. (It is a little earlier in Nepal than in Europe). She talked about Lisa and what a great job she had done for Sahaja Yoga. She said she had given realization to so many seekers who had travelled back to their home countries and become active Sahaja Yogis. Shri Mataji said that hopefully the Nepali yogis will realize one day how much she has done for the country. Shri Mataji then praised again the wonderful Nepalese wood carvings and with a little pity said, “They don’t know how to do business.” Then She gave Herbert some rough sketches of furniture She wanted to order. He promised Her he would bring the first design sketches for Sahasrara Puja.
Afterwards, Shri Mataji came to the living room where the whole Nepalese collective was already sitting in meditation and waiting for Her. She spoke to them saying that they should work on the left side and that they should fight against the tantrism, which is so strong in Nepal that it takes the seekers to hell. Shri Mataji said that She was very happy to see the collective in Nepal growing and nominated Herbert and Upataja as the leaders. After this speech, Shri Mataji left with all Her children for the flight back to Delhi.
The next day we went to the follow-up program in Kathmandu which was attended by 150 people. The vibrations during the meditation were very strong and most of them could feel the cool breeze. The second follow-up was two days later in the garden of the ashram. Twenty people came. Upataja spoke about the chakras and the new people listened with full attention.
The stay in Nepal was wonderful. Having received realization there five years ago, it was wonderful to see how well it had grown. Now they have to look after the next generation of seekers. Also, with the help of Ambika, with her sweetness, the King of Nepal may soon receive his realization. We wish all the Nepali yogis a lot of success in their Sahaja work. May they always be blessed by the divine love and vibrations of our Holy Mother. We thank them from the bottom of our hearts for the generosity, love and trust they gave us.
— Gita Hahn, Hamburg, Germany

A Project with Vibrated Seeds
On the occasion of Shri Mataji’s birthday celebration in Delhi this year, an idea came into my head to ask Her whether we could make a donation of vibrated seeds to Bosnia to help clear the vibrations and sow into this devastated land some peace and some Divine love. Her answer was, “Buy mainly wheat. This will be a very good present for them. May God bless you.”
As soon as we arrived back in Austria we initiated a collection so we could go ahead with our project. We collected altogether AS 107,500 (including donations from Germany and France) and with this bought about 7-8 tons of various seeds, mainly wheat. We were not sure how we were going to get the seeds vibrated as, at this time, Our Mother was still in India. We found out just the week before we had to travel down to Bosnia that Shri Mataji was returning to Cabella. Only one week later and the whole project would have had to be postponed until autumn as it would have been then too late to sow the seeds.
We travelled down to Cabella with a small portion of each of the types of seeds which we were donating. Shri Mataji spent at least two hours talking about Muslims and in general how they are the cause of most of the wars that are going on in the world at the moment. Being an ex-Muslim myself I really did not know what I could say in this conversation except that, “Shri Mataji, I know that our country is a horrible country and that Muslims are terribly fanatical and aggressive, but there are some nice ones in Sahaja Yoga who would really like to help prepare a Puja. It would help our country tremendously.” With that, She laughed and blessed Iran, along with Australia and the Far East to prepare Shri Ganesha Puja. Shri Mataji said, “They should help to prepare the first chakra, the Mooladhara, Shri Ganesha Puja.” Naturally I was overjoyed with this news.
Then Shri Mataji proceeded to vibrate the seeds and worked on them intensively. She asked me to identify each type of seed in detail. After two hours Shri Mataji said, “Alright, it is alright. You have My full attention and full blessings. You can go.”
There was then quite a lot of paper work to be carried out. All went quite smoothly until on Wednesday afternoon, two days before we planned to travel, we had a phone call from Mostar in Bosnia, saying that they did not need seeds at all, it would be a wasted investment. Somewhat taken aback, but also going on Our Mother’s words, I decided that it was just another one of those obstacles stopping vibrations from reaching a desperate country. As we had already ordered and received most of the seeds it was anyway too difficult to change.
Friday night we went to our seed source (namely Etter Seeds owned by an Austrian Sahaja Yogini and her husband) to mix the vibrated seeds with the bulk of the seeds. At 8 a.m. the semi-trailer arrived with our driver (a drunkard, chain smoker, caffeine addict) but who somehow had a heart. He was a very simple person who never complained at all. After furnishing the truck with a wonderful sign, Sahaja Yoga—Liebe kennt keine grenzen (Love knows no borders), we departed at 11 a.m. on Saturday morning, the 27th of April.
Our first waiting period was in Spielfeld at the Austrian border into Slovenia. Because of a holiday in Slovenia we couldn’t pass until 10 p.m. As the driver had spent seven hours in the bar (and most certainly couldn’t walk a straight line), I carefully suggested that we only go through to Slovenia and drive further to Zagreb the next day. He agreed, so we did not get very far the first day.
The second day there was again a problem at the Croatian border crossing into Bosnia. We waited 18 hours until Monday afternoon and because of a Muslim holiday, no one was working. At this time I did not know what Muslim holiday it was. I spoke to one official there and told him that we were bringing a present to Bosnia and that I felt that they should at least show their gratitude and get someone to come for half an hour to let us through. In the end the official agreed and a lady came especially for us. This lady was a Muslim and was complaining that it was her Gorban Holiday. I answered her, “I am also a Muslim, it is my holiday celebration also and, especially on this day, which is when all the Muslims in Mecca give a gift to God, she should consider how valuable my gift is.” She laughed and agreed that it was the perfect day for a donation, and stamped the papers immediately. She was very joyful about this and also very grateful for the few sweets I gave to her children.
On arriving in Bihać I could see that a lot of people were hovering around the truck and wanted to immediately take the seeds, but I was really not sure to whom they would go and whether or not the people would sell the seeds. I definitely did not want these vibrated seeds to be sold and money made out of them. I wanted to be absolutely certain of this. Shri Mataji said one time, “If you find yourself in a position where confusion arises, then just go into the Sahasrara and meditate for a while and the answer will come to you.” So I sat and meditated.
A man came up shortly afterwards and said, “Hey, why are you sleeping?” I said “I’m not sleeping. I am going inside myself to try to find out what to do. I have a big responsibility for these seeds.” (Thank goodness, he spoke German.) I explained to him that I did not want these seeds to be sold and did not feel good about just giving them to anyone. On top of that, the seeds were sprayed with a fungicide which would be dangerous to them if they decided to grind the seeds instead of plant them. He agreed with me and told me that not far away there was a UN World Food Organization. He offered to come with us and show us the way.
On arrival, I was introduced to the Manager who was from Bosnia and also a Muslim. He looked at me and clapped his hands together and said, “You must be sent from God, you really must be sent from God. Yesterday we had to send all our farmers away because we had run out of seeds and we had no idea from where on earth we could get seeds so late in the season. You really must be sent from God.” I said, “That is true, I am sent from God.” He was such an honest man and promised in the name of Allah, Mohammed and also in front of the photo of Shri Mataji that he would not sell these seeds and would distribute them to the needy farmers. I also asked him to promise to give every farmer that collected the seeds a photo of Shri Mataji and tell them that She was the one who donated these seeds. This was the best way that I could think of so that the people would keep the photo and also respect it. If someone has donated such a precious gift to them, then they will surely not throw the photo away. He agreed to do this and was extremely happy. He was the first Bosnian to receive his realization. Although it was difficult to make him understand about self-realization because of the language barrier, he was a very open hearted man.
Thank you to all those who helped financially and vibrationally on this project to make it flow so well. And thank you Holy Mother for allowing me to do this work for you. I hope that now Bihać, before materialism and fundamentalism settle in, will be at peace and hopefully many people will get their realization. Perhaps Slovenian yogis who speak the same language can help them out in the near future.
— Love to all. Your brother, Hamid Mylany, Austria

News from Around the World
Shri Mataji Wins International Le Plejade Peace Award
On May 2, the judges of the 10th edition of the International Award “La Plejade” proclaimed Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi as the 1996 award winner. The judges included professors and doctors from different countries. Patronage for the award was provided by the Presidency of the Council of Ministers, the European Parliament office in Italy, the Planning Institute for Quality of Life and Unipaz (both U.N. associated), the Cosmos International Association, the Art Events Association, with the collaboration of the 3M Italy Group.
The following motivations were provided as the basis for selecting Shri Mataji to receive this award:
“In a world where one can feel the urgent need to find new solutions to the problems of individuals and of humanity at large, searching for something that can allow one to go deep into the awareness of existence itself, Shri Mataji (who is presently a candidate for the next Nobel Prize for Peace), founder of Sahaja Yoga, is proposing new directions on the path of human evolution through meetings and initiatives, guiding us to meditate on the deepest dimensions of ourselves, and helping the foundation of a balanced and serene society where peace can be actualized, starting in the deep self of each individual.”
The award was received by Guido on behalf of Shri Mataji. He briefly thanked them while making the point in a very respectful and gentle way that it was an honour for them to give it to Her.
Magsaysay Award for T. N. Seshan
Mr. Seshan, a realized soul, is a great admirer of our Divine Mother and of Sahaja Yoga. He gave a very moving speech on the occasion of Shri Mataji’s Birthday in Delhi in 1995. His successful conduct of the recent elections was essentially due to his following the advice which Shri Mataji gave him.
On Monday, July 8, T N Seshan, India’s Chief Election Commissioner, was named winner of the 1996 Ramon Magsaysay award for government service. The Awards Board in Manila, the Philippines cited the tough-talking Seshan for successfully presiding over India’s recent parliamentary polls, dubbed the most peaceful, cleanest and orderly so far in the world’s largest democracy.
“When India’s politicians proved reluctant to legislate reforms, he launched a crusade of his own… (and) cowed the high and mighty and restored credibility to the electoral system,” the Awards Board said. It said the 63-year-old Seshan suppressed local goons, prevented theft of ballot boxes and vote-buying, banned ostentatious campaign displays and noisy rallies, and enforced spending limits. “He also exposed politicians who used public resources for electioneering, banned election propaganda based on religion, and banned the sale of liquor and seized unlicensed guns at election time, among others,” it added. “Although the campaign was almost cheerless and devoid of colour, it resulted in clean elections which impressed most foreign observers,” the statement read.
Seshan will receive a certificate, a medallion, and a US $50,000 prize. The award, the Asian equivalent of the Nobel prize, was named for a popular Philippine president who died in a plane crash in 1957. The award will be presented on August 31. Awardees for public service, community leadership, journalism, literature and creative communication, arts, and international understanding will be named in the coming days.
Some Special Moments in Cabella with Shri Mataji
On May 12, Shri Mataji met all the Italian Sahaja Yogis who had gathered from all over Italy on the occasion of Mother’s Day. Flowers from the international and national collectives were offered; in the end, there was a hall full of flowers. In a talk to the Italian collective, Shri Mataji’s main message was to become totally identified with Sahaja Yoga, with its activities and ashrams which allow you to enjoy more and more.
Late one afternoon at Cabella during the sunset, Shri Mataji was sitting facing the window while two Sahaja Yogis were arranging Her luggage. She suddenly started saying, “I have already done My job. Now the vibrations of the Sahaja Yogis have increased a lot, but it is only through all of you people that Sahaja Yoga should spread. I do not have any desires but you should have. I do not have any desire, but if I had any it is this, that Sahaja Yoga should spread to everyone…. Feel the vibrations.” So the Sahaja Yogis who were there with Her put out their hands, and although they were right next to the two gas heaters, they could feel tremendously cool vibrations.
While this was happening in the Castle, three Swiss Sahaja Yogis were shoebeating in the garden of the Castle. At the end of the shoebeating session, one of them felt his Sahasrara completely open. He said he had never felt it like that before. At that same time, Shri Mataji asked one of the two Sahaja Yogis in the room with Her who these people were and what they were doing. One answered that they were Sahaja Yogis and that they were shoebeating. She continued looking at them and said that it was a very good idea, that they feel very responsible.
Genova Public Program June 1996
On the 18th of June, three years after the last public program with Shri Mataji in Italy, we had a chance to witness the awakening of one thousand seekers in a theatre in Genova. The event had been announced in two newspapers with two beautiful articles whose titles were, “Enchanting India lives with Shri Nirmala Devi” and “The Great Mother who guides to peace.”
After an introductory video there was an interview with Mr. Guido, “the president of the Sahaja Yoga association in Italy”! Then the Swiss group presented some bhajans which held the audience spellbound along with the miracle pictures of Shri Mataji, projected on a big screen at the same time. Even though Shri Mataji came one hour and a half after the beginning of the program, only one or two people had left the hall.
Before Her speech, the vice-president of the local government gave a welcome address pointing out Shri Mataji’s role in the achievement of peace in the world. After a short speech Shri Mataji said that all of them had already received their realization, so for the first time in Italy, She used the Indian way of giving realization. Then Shri Mataji went to have a pizza in the same place where all the Sahaja Yogis from all over Italy had assembled to eat. She was very happy about the program and said that many seekers lived in Genova, where She stayed for the night (even though Cabella is only 40 minutes away), vibrating the whole city.
— Marco di Fabio, Italy
Petali di Loto
The New Italian Newsletter
A group of Sahaja Yogis living in Sicily has been informally publishing an Italian newsletter since 1993. At the Second National Seminar held in Tarquinia, Italy, they suggested that “Petali di Loto,” with new graphics and content, could become the official Italian newsletter, and the whole collectivity of 400 yogis expressed great interest. The purpose of the newsletter is to create a connection between the Italian centres through an exchange of news regarding what’s happening within the country and abroad. For more information about this newsletter, or to send information for publication in this newsletter, contact Guido Caruso, Piazza Gen. Cascino n.86, 90142 Palermo, Italy. Telephone/Fax: 0039-91-6373997.
The Theatre of Eternal Values
At the request of our Divine Mother, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, a seminar was held in Belgium during the week of May 12 through May 19 in order to form “an international Sahaja Yoga theatre company called ‘The Theatre of Eternal Values’.” A group of about 20 yogis representing many European countries and one representing the United States met to formulate artistic policies, to draw up a workable plan of action for the 1996-97 seasons, and to set up fund raising and promotional activities. Preparations were also made for an autumn 1996 European and Indian tour of a play by Moliere, a French playwright who was realized. For future productions, great emphasis will be placed on the classics. Also, plays written by Sahaja Yogis will be considered. Apart from the fact that the company will help to spread vibrations, Shri Mataji has also requested the formation of this theatrical group to spread western culture to India.
Meeting every day in a huge barn-like building about four kilometres from the ashram in Brakel, Belgium, a small town in the countryside, the dedicated and hard-working yogis started a very capable and talented ensemble. Many workshops led by various yogis were conducted. Lessons in movement, voice, acting and singing were held and the use of masks and clown costumes led to some hilarious improvisations. With much help from the Belgian yogis and yoginis, the groups of actors, set designers, writers and musicians were able to conclude an intense and focused week where much was accomplished. At the end of the week, a wonderful and fun-filled show consisting of improvisations and songs was performed to about 40 yogis and their children. After the performance, dinner was held and then everyone danced until 2:00 a.m. Everyone had a great time and truly enjoyed themselves as all felt Shri Mataji’s attention and vibrations.
All the yogis realized the great importance of the entire week. First of all, it had been requested by Shri Mataji, and as one yogi stated, it was an historical meeting because never had so many realized souls come together for such a purpose before. True creativity comes from the Divine and all the yogis involved in this company desire and pray that a great artistic theatrical ensemble soon will help to spread Shri Mataji’s message. Let us all desire great success for “The Theatre of Eternal Values.”
Time to Act—Not to Discuss!
Moscow Meeting, February 23–25, 1996
We, the Sahaja Yogis of Russia and the CIS (Commonwealth of Independent States) are deeply grateful to the Mother who blessed and gave us a wonderful celebration of communication and vibrational exchange—the Moscow Meeting of February 1996. We express great acknowledgement and love towards all the Sahaja Yogis who came to the Celebration! 313 representatives from 94 cities and towns of Russia and CIS (including the Moscow Region) and 500 Sahaja Yogis from Moscow took part. At this meeting, the city leaders shared the experiences they have had in many spheres of activity: children’s education, medicine, science, young people’s education, sociology, and communication with representatives of other teachings and religions, culture, and art.
It was decided that the positive experiences of the Moscow Union of Sahaja Yogis in spreading Sahaja Yoga using different methods ought to be shared through:
participation in international forums and exhibitions focused on such spheres of our life as education, medicine, conversion and new professions, and human ecology, in which, apart from professionalism, spirituality has great importance.
creativity and revival of national traditions performing local shows of creative collectives in cities and towns, and holding the “Russian Winter Send-off” Celebrations in Moscow featuring invited representatives of social organizations, people of culture, medicine, education, science and other religious teachings.
participation in the activities of the forthcoming Creative Laboratory, organized by the Moscow City Duma (Parliament). One of the tasks of the Laboratory is to unite people professing different philosophical and spiritual teachings and religions, and to carry spiritual knowledge to people. This is very difficult and important aspect of Sahaja Yogis’ activity.
The opening of an Information Centre under the auspices of the Moscow Union of Sahaja Yogis is also very important. This Information Centre will support operational connections with the Sahaja Yoga Centres of other Russian, CIS and world cities, and it will provide up to date information of current events. This centre will serve as a base for the following projects:
an “Electronic Herald” which will issue and spread the Sahaja newspaper throughout the e-mail system; and
an “Information Centre” telling about Sahaja Yoga through the Internet worldwide.
It is planned to start a Video Studio under the auspices of the Moscow Union of Sahaja Yogis to produce professional-quality video films corresponding to world TV standards. The video shooting will be made using professional equipment in Betacam-SP format. Copying will be done in VHS and Super VHS formats. All the pujas, press conferences, interviews and events held by Shri Mataji will be videotaped. These tapes will be protected by licence. The films may be used for broadcasting on Central and Regional TV, which is very important for the development of Sahaja Yoga in such a vast country as Russia.
The Togliatti Sahaja Yogis’ experience in various fields is very interesting, including:
spreading Sahaja Yoga into different strata including people in jails and addiction health centres;
working in the Young People’s Parliament under the City Mayor on the law-making level; for example, by the labour of young people all the immoral literature was no longer for sale and showing of pornography films was banned;
struggling with the mafia;
starting their own ceramic workshop, which will provide jobs for Sahaja Yogis and will help to spread Sahaja Yoga through these works of art;
issuing the “Generation” newspaper as well as the “Newspaper for All” for spiritual family reading.
The work of the Voronej Sahaja Yogis was noted. They gave Realization to seekers in science and research institutes, colleges, and schools, and had positive contacts with the Patriarchate.
Great attention is being paid to scientific research presently, which is very important to confirm the reality of Sahaja Yoga:
There was research conducted in Semashko Science and Research Institute of Social Hygiene and Health Care Management Economy in Moscow based on questionnaires completed by Russian and CIS Sahaja Yogis. It had very important facts for confirmation of the Sahaja Yoga method. The work will be continued.
Professional psychologists, sociologists and doctors from Kiev, all Sahaja Yogis, did some very interesting research using a questionnaire. The research was held in the following areas: psychology; health; behaviour; and general living manifestations. Preliminary results have been obtained and the work is being continued.
Sahaja Yogis from Novosibirsk are permanently taking part in several scientific research projects:
examination of Sahaja Yogis’ brain work at different stages of Sahaja meditation with modern equipment was started. The examination was being held in the Novosibirsk Institute of Medical and Biological Cybernetics, the Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Science. The results were presented at the International Conference called “Morality, Health, Peace, East-West” in St.Petersburg in September, 1995.
In September Novosibirsk Sahaja Yogis took part in an International Congress entitled, “Science and Education at the Threshold of the Third Century” which was held in Novosibirsk. Representatives of UNESCO and of many countries of the world participated in it. Dr. Yogi Mahajan addressed the Congress with a speech. Shri Mataji’s book, “Enlightenment” was presented.
In all of the addresses the necessity of self-improvement, inner growth, and achieving depth in Sahaja Yoga was emphasized, since we have to become truly a reflection of the Divine, and be an example of it. A particularly important thing for all of us seems to be active and busy participation in specific Sahaja Yoga matters, especially working on the subtle level. In certain centres (St. Petersburg, Chelyabinsk) these things are not being paid attention to in due course; they do not hold collective havans and shoebeatings.
The work on spiritual development of children is gaining great importance. There is a need for a program and methods of spiritual development for children that is officially approved. It is necessary now to spread Sahaja Yoga among children in a very delicate manner: we should not give children Realization without prior approval by their parents.
During this Moscow meeting special attention was given to Sahaja Yoga protocol because, unfortunately, it is not being followed by all Sahaja Yogis. The importance of protocol towards leaders and between leaders was emphasized.
The work on young people is very important nowadays: their active participation in all Sahaja Yoga matters, especially in creativity, informational and publishing work, is necessary.
For the execution of big joint projects it was decided to start a “General Fund of Russia and CIS Countries.” The Executive Board consisting of the following city leaders was sanctioned: Moscow, St. Petersburg, Kiev, Novosibirsk, Togliatti, Voronej, and Nabereznye Chelny.
Conclusions made by Sahaja Yogis from Western Europe were examined and the decision was made to organize working groups for doing necessary work within their living place and also thematic groups working on specific projects to develop Sahaja Yoga.
As suggested by Professor Y. Voronov, it was decided to study the matter of establishing a Mother’s Museum and preparing for it all necessary materials such as films, photographs, audio and video tapes, books, magazines, paintings, pictures and other items.
The matter of assistance to Kingisepp with finance and working hands was approved.
It was suggested to all the Russian and CIS Sahaja Yogis to take part in worldwide meditation every week on Sunday at 3 p.m. May our powerful collective vibrations cleanse our Planet and bring people peace and ease. Russian and CIS Sahaja Yogis who took part in the Meeting experienced Divine Vibrations during all those days. Peace and Silence were pouring upon the surroundings. Havan and Puja gave a feeling of universal combination, high vibrations and collectivity. The third day of the Meeting was especially joy-giving for all the Sahaja Yogis and guests. It included a play, exhibitions, tasting of soya products, and national costumes, with halls and rooms beautifully decorated by our artists.
But the main point which was marked by the guests was so many benevolent, joyous and beautiful people with smiles, love and open hearts. All the guests took part in dancing and singing and there was a feeling that the joy was encompassing the whole planet. We are grateful to all the participants of the Meeting for their collective work which allowed us to enter a new stage and unite our mutual efforts in fulfilling our Mother’s Divine Vision. Jai Shri Mataji!
— Pavel B. Zaitsev, Russia
New Ashram in Argentina
Our Divine Mother has blessed Argentina with a new ashram which is from now on our main centre. This house is in the suburbs of Buenos Aires in a very peaceful area. It is much bigger than the previous house and it has a big and pleasant garden as well. Shri Mataji told us during Her last visit to Argentina to try to get a house a little bit outside of the city, and She also pointed to this area. By Her blessings everything has worked out in a very Sahaja way and we all find this is exactly what She wanted. The new address is:
Mr. Mariano Martinez
Cuyo 937. Martinez.
(1640) Buenos Aires, Argentina
Phone/Fax: (54 1) 798-9378

Announcements
International Poetry Book
As you might know from a previous message, the International Poetry Book project is under way and its coordinator, Sergio from Switzerland, is awaiting your poetry contributions. There are many beautiful Sahaj poems that have been published in national and international newsletters from the olden times that could be submitted for publication in this book, and there must have been many poems written by Sahaja Yogis ever since, by the blessings of Shri Saraswati.
This message is a request to find coordinators of the project for each country, which we hope will boost the rate of contributions of poems from all around the world. You are kindly requested to find a coordinator in your country (preferably who has e-mail, but not necessarily; could be yourself) whose sole responsibility will be to make the project known to all the Yogis in your country and send contributions to Sergio.
The number of poems needed for publishing the book we would like to publish has not yet been reached, and we would not want this project to die out. Once again your enlightened attention and help for the spreading of the news of this project and seeing it through to completion is requested. We know that once this number is reached, the book will be a great delight for all of us, and above all, a beautiful collective work of enlightened inspiration to be presented to our Divine Mother.
Please contact Sergio as soon as a coordinator of your country has been found.
Jay Shri Ganesha Shri Mahasaraswati Shri Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namaha!
Shri Mataji’s Itinerary
Subject to Change
Month
Dates
Event / Location
August/September


Fr–Su
30–1
Shri Krishna Puja Seminar, Cabella
Fr–We
5–11
Tour of China
Th
12
Arrival in India
We
25
Travel to Cabella
Fr–Su
27–29
Shri Ganesha Puja Seminar, Cabella
October


Th–Tu
3–15
Tour of USA and Canada
We
16
Return to Cabella
Fr–Su
18–20
Navaratri Puja Seminar, Cabella
We–Th
23–31
Tour of Brazil and Argentina
November


Fr–Su
1–3
Tour of Brazil and Argentina continues
Mo
4
Travel to Cabella
We
6
Travel to Portugal
Fr–Su
8–10
Diwali Puja Seminar, Portugal
Tu
12
Travel to Cabella
Th
14
Travel to New Delhi
December


Mo–Tu
2–31
India Tour
Copyright © 2026 Nirmala Vidya Amruta. All Rights Reserved. Privacy | Terms of Use | Amruta is supported by the WordPress Multilingual Plugin. | oska.dev
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
About WordPress
Nirmala Vidya Amruta
Hi, Prashant handge
Search