SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 1996-03-03
TALK: Nirmala Vidya Amruta
LOCATION/EVENT: in-the-region-around-the-same-time-as-the-internat
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:23:01
CHARS: 103926
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
Post navigation
Previous post:
The Divine Cool Breeze, Sept-Oct 1995, Vol. 9, Nos. 8 and 9
Next post:
The Divine Cool Breeze, April-May 1996, Vol. 10, Nos. 3 and 4.pdf
The Divine Cool Breeze, Feb-March 1996, Vol. 10, Nos. 1 and 2
Books online | All Books
Thursday, February 1st, 1996
DCB
Magazine
Online, PDF
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English
Google Drive
The Divine Cool Breeze
February and March 1996
Volume 10, Nos. 1 and 2
International Newsletter

“God’s realization is to know about God…. You reach that state where… you are now definitely settled in the Kingdom of God and that you can see God, you can feel God, you can understand God, and you can love God.”

— Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Mahashivaratri Puja, Sydney, Australia, March 3, 1996

![Cover Image: Portrait of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi wearing a golden sari and crown]

The Divine Cool Breeze
AUSTRALIA TOUR 1996
Mahashivaratri Puja Talk Synopsis
Sydney Airport Talk Synopsis
Shri Mataji’s Australian Tour 1996
Our Place in the Virata — Australia and New Zealand
1996 Asia Tour Report
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in Taiwan
Shri Mataji’s visit to Hong Kong
Shri Mataji’s Visit to Malaysia
Shri Mataji’s Visit to Thailand
Medical Conferences in China, Japan and the Philippines
Manila, The Philippines
Beijing, China
Tokyo, Japan
Announcements
Shri Mataji’s Itinerary
Editors Note:
If you have photographs of Shri Mataji which you feel would be suitable for the cover of the Divine Cool Breeze, please send a copy and/or a negative to the address below, along with the place and date if they are known. We welcome original illustrations, decorations and border art (pen and ink reproduces best) and articles about Sahaja Yoga in your country. Please let us know if there are any errors in the information on the inside front cover.

For information about subscriptions, to send contributions, or to contact the editors:
The Divine Cool Breeze
6276 Lakewood Street
San Diego CA 92122
U.S.A.
Telephone (01-619) 546-9379
Fax (01-619) 458-0757
E-Mail [contact-redacted]

AUSTRALIA TOUR 1996
Mahashivaratri Puja Talk Synopsis
Sydney, Australia, March 3, 1996

“Shri Shiva is the reflection of Sadashiva within us.” Sadashiva is the God Almighty, the Father watching over Shri Adi Shakti’s creation. He has no doubts about Shri Adi Shakti’s capability but when He finds, in the play of Adi Shakti, that anyone tries to disturb or spoil Her work, He gets in a wrathful mood and may destroy such people or the whole world. On one side Sadashiva is wrathful, on the other He is the ocean of compassion and joy. “That’s why when He is reflected within us, we get our self-realization.” The light of our Spirit shines and we are immersed in the ocean of joy.

“Also, He is the ocean of knowledge so those who get self-realized get the knowledge of the Divine which is very subtle, permeating into every atom and molecule.” His style is so compassionate that He forgives even cruel rakshasas if they dedicate themselves to Him. Sometimes these same rakshasas who are blessed by Him try to trouble the devotees of Adi Shakti, but this is just to create a drama, an event. We had to have the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, the crucifixion of Christ and the torture of Mohammed to help people understand the work of the Divine. “In the spiritual life of human beings, they have seen lots of dramas between the blessings of Shiva and the powers of Adi Shakti.” At this point in history, thousands can get realization. We have to know the meaning of our realization.

“First of all I have to tell you, the mind about which we speak and depend upon is a myth. There’s nothing like mind. Brain is reality, not the mind. Mind is created by reacting to outside. Either we react to conditionings or to our ego. Thus the mind is created like bubbles on the ocean of reality.” But the bubbles are not the reality. What we know through the mind is limited, elusive and sometimes shocking. The mind is not real; it can only move in a linear direction. All the projections of mind recoil and come back to us as a destructive power, or as a big shock because they have no reality. We have to know how to get out of the trap of the mind.

“Kundalini is the solution.” When awakened, She takes you beyond the mind. Whatever you do with the mind will not be satisfying. No problem can be solved with the mind. If you depend on the mind, you develop physical, mental and emotional problems. The latest of such problems is stress, for which people say there is no solution. “But in Sahaja Yoga, we find the solution by crossing over this mind. It’s like a barrier to our advancement… Your Kundalini has taken your attention beyond the mind.”

Our brain is like a prism. When energy enters, it is refracted; then our attention goes out and we react. (This is explained in Shri Mataji’s books.) If we react too much, the bubbles create a horrible mind which can justify anything. The ego and conditioning that creates this mind start using the mind to fulfill their ideas, which are not based in reality. We created the computer, now we are slaves of the computer. Likewise we create our minds and then our minds dominate us. A person with a strong mind like Hitler can use an idea to dominate and destroy others, having a far-reaching effect on our culture and spirituality.

“The first step is to become thoughtlessly aware, where you cross your mind. You go above your mind. Mind cannot affect you.” This is thoughtless awareness. The second step is when you start seeing the working of the all-pervading power, the Paramchaitanya. You start becoming aware that there is truth in what Shri Mataji says, and that this power works out many things miraculously. It gives blessings, guides, and helps. It gives health, wealth, and “a very good society of very beautiful people in the collective.”

It is easy to achieve thoughtless awareness, but difficult to maintain. We still react and think. Anything we see, we react to. To get to that point of thoughtless awareness, first change your attention. When your attention is always outside, you must learn to divert it to beautiful things. Look at something beautiful without thinking. The beauty of that object will reveal itself to you, the joy of the artist will fill you. “A cool kind of relaxation will come into you, and this Kundalini will rise and you will become steady in your thoughtless awareness.”

This only happens when “your attention is diverted from criticizing or reacting… Become the witness.” Even after realization, we don’t realize we have to witness everything. When you witness through the spirit, you only see the good points of something. The witness state enlarges and you start enjoying other people, enjoying everything.

You must “find out what stops your thoughts, what makes you the witness. Once you develop this habit, you will station yourself nicely in thoughtless awareness.” You see how Sahaja Yoga has helped, how blissful it is, what you have achieved.

If you witness, you will be amazed how, because of Krita Yuga, the Paramchaitanya acts everywhere. You have seen in the photographs how it plays around with the vibrations, how it writes the name of Shri Mataji above the heads of the yogis in Arabic. The mind will still try and argue. “Don’t listen. Just watch.” You’ll be able to see the changes in yourself. This witness state will then take you to another realm called doubtless awareness where you can give realization to others, you can talk to others and give them complete knowledge about Sahaja Yoga, you can emit vibrations.

Your whole spiritual state will become very blissful. You will become powerful, loving, compassionate, balanced, and confident. Your destructive and depressing ideas will be cleansed from you and you will stand up as a great Sahaji, a great realized soul who can do tremendous work in the world. In thoughtless and doubtless awareness you become completely confident.

Your attention is enlightened through meditation. You must motivate your enlightened attention and put it to various problems that you face. Things will work out because you become the instrument of the all-pervading power which is trying to create a new world and new human beings. This evolution can be very fast if you all decide that you should “put this attention to some use. It should not be wasted.”

The main point of today’s talk is what is God’s realization. First is self-realization. Many ambitious people want to become God realized. “First and foremost thing we should know that human beings cannot become God.” You have not become the Spirit, actually, but the Spirit is acting through you. “If you become the Spirit, there won’t be any body left… So with this body intact your spirit is acting through this body, is giving you all the light. But one cannot become God Almighty… God’s realization is to know about God.”

“To know about God means understanding how His powers are working, how He controls, by becoming part and parcel of God Almighty.” A finger cannot become the brain but it has to act absolutely according to the brain because it is so connected to it. “When you have the God’s realization, then you know about the brain. You know about God.” It is difficult to achieve because “I’m a Mahamaya… I am quite an elusive person… Whatever I achieve it is just for you to see and understand that, after all, this is Adi Shakti and She can do all these things. You can also do all the things but you cannot become Me.”

To know God’s powers through love, devotion, and prayers is the way you are God realized. If you have the knowledge of God then you can control everything. This is only possible in complete humility, and understanding that you cannot become God Almighty or the Deities. “But definitely you can become God realized—means God acts through you, uses you as His power, as His channel, and that you know what He is doing to you, what He is telling, what His vision is.” That is how the connection works. Many yogis do not realize how they have been benefited, how it has worked out, how this connection has helped them.

Many saints who have achieved God’s realization have also fallen because they developed ego. They didn’t have the humility, the surrendering. They felt they achieved something with great difficulty and didn’t want to share it. “Mohammed Sahib has talked about Islam meaning you surrender. If you cannot surrender, you can never know God.”

As Sahajis, you have to know that you achieve the little things, the big things, as well as the great visions, and that you enter the Kingdom of God by the grace of God, through His blessings and love. But even if Shri Mataji says that you have entered the Kingdom of God and have achieved that state, Sahaja Yogis may still not be actually there until they know all about the Kingdom of God.

“One of the qualities of Shri Shiva is complete detachment and that is what you have to develop.” This doesn’t mean neglect. Parents have to create a rapport with their children. The school looks after them properly, but the parents must also get involved in developing discipline and a proper sense when they are at home. This will not work if you get attached to them. If you are attached then you are limited.

“All these limitations have to be dropped if you have to cross over,
and these limitations create such a big load
that whatever I may try,
whatever you may try,
you cannot stay in thoughtless awareness.
That’s a very beautiful state
in which all of you should be there.
In that you are not dominating,
nor you are compromising.
You stand on your own legs
and you know for definite
that you are not swayed away by any idea
or any domination
or any subjection of yours by anyone.
So you become completely a free bird,
absolutely a free bird,
and then it becomes your job to achieve your flight.
One flight is up to the thoughtless awareness,
the second one is up to the doubtless awareness,
and the third one is to God’s realization.”

Often those who are close to Shri Mataji don’t understand. They behave as if they have become Gods, very egoistical. Then they have to leave Sahaja Yoga. So if you are praised, you shouldn’t get pampered. It’s a test. Or if you are told you have to improve, you shouldn’t mind. Your job is to listen to Shri Mataji. “You may not become what I am. Agreed… Please try to get all the powers that I have, which is not a difficult thing.” That is God’s realization. “Through the Shiva you know Sadashiva. You see the reflection and from reflection you know who is the original… Thus you reach that state where… you are now definitely settled in the Kingdom of God and that you can see God, you can feel God, you can understand God, and you can love God. May God bless you.”

Sydney Airport Talk Synopsis
Sydney, Australia, March 5, 1996

It is always a pleasure to meet you all, “but this time I felt you are very much in the Ocean of Joy, enjoying your Self. That is the greatest satisfaction for Me. The best way to feel your joy is to give realization to others. That is the real echo you get of your voice of truth.” As in other countries, you are also going to different places, to villages, to different neighbourhoods, and talking with full conviction about Sahaja Yoga, how it has changed your life and how you have been benefited, with conviction. If you convince people about your genuineness, you can do a lot for your country by transforming people.

Sahaja Yoga has grown so much in Australia. Sometimes there have been individuals who have tried to harm us, but no one had tried to harm Sahaja Yoga. Those who have tried to cause trouble have quietly left Sahaja Yoga and disappeared. This time someone did try to cause trouble, but the yogis should not be disturbed by such occurrences, or by such horrible negative people.

Burwood Ashram has become too small. Shri Mataji is willing to donate to Sahaja Yoga in Australia because people want to buy a plot of land for an ashram. However, there are so many yogis, and they are all earning, so it is important that they should donate as well. “Everybody must cooperate…. Nobody is going to force you, nobody is going to be compelled… but it’s for your own satisfaction…. Everybody should feel responsible for Sahaja Yoga…. If you don’t feel responsible, individually you cannot enjoy. Individually there’s no joy for Sahaja Yogis; only in collective feeling you can have it.”

When the Ajanta caves were built, it took eleven centuries to make them. One generation after another enthusiastically kept building it, despite the fact that they had never even seen Buddha, or talked or written to Him, but they were very dedicated. They stayed in that remote place generation after generation, creating what is now one of the wonders of the world.

So you have to understand, as realized souls, you can do a lot through your desire and dedication. You have to always ask yourselves what you are doing for Sahaja Yoga, and realize how much Sahaja Yoga has done for you. You are now very well placed, and very happy. So the way you will enjoy is by knowing that you are working something out for Sahaja Yoga.

The leader has been very careful, sensible and kind. But now there should be a very dynamic leader because many will be coming to Sahaja Yoga. “You’ll have to deal with them, and when you are dealing with them remember that you are Sahaja Yogis—not to lose temper, not to get angry with them. Be kind to them and also try to talk less and do more, raising their Kundalini. Don’t touch them. That’s not necessary.”

Shri Mataji then spoke in Hindi to the Indian ladies. “I was just correcting them and telling them that they should keep to their own culture.” Some have started talking like American women, very rude. In India women are especially humble, and the language is very compassionate and docile which makes others feel comfortable. But the American culture drives people mad and those who adopt it will also become mad. We don’t want that culture. “We want a very compassionate, good, kind and a beautiful culture,” through which others can learn, and our children can grow properly. “In every way it’s much more helpful if you are humble.”

It is a joy to see how very humble the Australians have become. Australians used to be horrible, drinking so much and speaking in a way no one could understand. Now you are beautiful like lotuses which have “come out of this mixed-up confused culture, and you should be the ones who should represent this, our Sahaja culture.”

There are still many funny things going on in the society at large. Shri Mataji’s book, Meta Modern Era, describes how we have gone wrong in western life. This will help us to understand the problems.

“I wish all of you a very good, prosperous, healthy Sahaja life, and to your children…. Sahaja Yoga has taken very good roots in Australia because it is Shri Ganesha’s country. His blessings are working.” You should help those who are sick or need help. “Try to understand how to cure them…. Don’t touch them. You can take bandhans before doing anything and you’ll be protected. So may God bless you all.”

Shri Mataji’s Australian Tour 1996
Attention, desire and love towards Shri Mataji’s tour began many months before She blessed the shores of Her land of Shri Ganesha with Her physical presence. These words were begun on the first night of this tour, Our Mother resting at Her home under the stars of the southern skies. From its beginning, the nature of this tour would be like no other before it. Shri Mataji would visit Sydney, and spend six days in the country before embarking on the Asian Tour. During this time there would be one public program and we would be allowed to worship Her as Lord Shiva. Yogis from Australia, New Zealand and the Sahaja World gathered in Sydney to worship Her. The site selected by Shri Mataji was at the geographical centre of Sydney.

The Burwood National Centre has served as an ashram for over fifteen years, and was collectively purchased eight years ago. Renovations to prepare the ashram for Shri Mataji began in earnest prior to the departure of yogis on the India Tour. The ashram was renovated inside and out in preparation for Her stay. Work continued in December, into the New Year and until the last days before Shri Mataji’s arrival. Much effort was expended, and the momentum generated through this collective work carried all before it.

During the planning for the tour it was decided that we should select a large venue. Last year’s theatre could not accommodate the response from the public. The venue selected was the Sydney Darling Harbour Convention Centre, the largest auditorium in the city. This was to be the largest public program attempted in the country, and as a collective we were committing ourselves to filling it. While the renovation work at Burwood continued apace, other Yogis concentrated upon organising the National Puja, while others set themselves the task of organising a public program befitting Shri Mataji.

Due to the generous support of the national collective, an expansive advertising campaign was planned to inform the public about Her coming. The theme of the advertising featured Shri Mataji’s photograph with the quote, “Acclaimed as the world’s greatest living saint.” Advertising space was hired at the major transport hubs for large back-lit posters, and newspaper, radio and television advertisements were placed. We organised a collective poster day when all Yogis collectively postered, overwhelming the city with their enthusiasm and vibrations. Through Shri Mataji’s grace we were able to find a site for a large billboard featuring Shri Mataji’s poster. This year the poster was again located alongside a major transport route, but rather than being located 20 storeys from street level, it was only three storeys from street level. The billboard dominated the skyline for miles around, with Shri Mataji’s beaming and radiant face showering benevolence on all who passed beneath it, providing a potent symbol of Divinity for all to see.

All the advertising that we have used in the past has been static or fixed at one point; this year we introduced transit or moving advertising. Advertising space was hired on the exterior surfaces of buses; in all, about seven per cent of the buses in Sydney were adorned with two large posters. As the buses moved through the suburbs of the city they distributed the message about the public program and spread vibrations. The night before Shri Mataji’s arrival a sense of peace settled over the place of Her residence. Meditation became effortless and tranquil, untouched by any disturbance of the mind. All was in readiness for Her coming.

Thursday, 29th February
The great day which Yogis the world over treasure had finally come—Shri Mataji arrived in our city, Sydney. She came to Australia from India via a one night rest in Hong Kong. She arrived in the morning to again find the skies above laden with rain bearing clouds. Yogis in the hundreds were at the airport to greet Shri Mataji.

Through a prior arrangement with Customs officials, Shri Mataji was met at Her aircraft by the national leader. He then escorted Shri Mataji and Her party to the VIP reception lounge where She spent some time with the leaders before being welcomed by the collective. She came amongst us like the blazing sun in all its glory, Her radiant smile lifting the spirits and filling our hearts with joy. Many began to sing while those around Her offered flowers of welcome. She paused here and there to talk to children and to bless many of the newborns. As She greeted Her children, tears of emotion could be seen in Her eyes. She left the arrival lounge, walked through the terminal building and approached Her car. A gentle breeze began to blow, gently caressing Her hair and face. She looked to the heavens and smiled, it seemed as if the elements were also welcoming Her.

It appeared from the start that this would be a different tour, both in relation to its length and the amount of time Shri Mataji would be spending with us. In previous years we could spend time within the meditation room of Burwood during Her stay. This tour we would be seeing Her only at the public program and during the puja weekend. Shri Mataji spent the day resting and settling into Her home.

Saturday, 2nd March, Bundilla Camp, Sydney
This was the first day of the puja weekend. Sahaja Yogis from the vast and widely dispersed regions of the country began assembling on Friday, with the pilgrimage continuing on through the night and throughout the next day. By the day of puja, 700 Yogis were in attendance. Sahajis from all the states and cities, as well as from the neighbouring country of New Zealand were there in force. Visitors from South East Asia, Europe and the U.S. were also represented.

During the months prior to the tour a dedicated group of Yogis had established a one-hour radio show which is broadcast from stations throughout the country fortnightly. The show has proved a great success. During the morning an interview was recorded with Shri Mataji for broadcast the following day. The interview was aimed at generally promoting Sahaja Yoga to the public.

Following this interview, Shri Mataji was asked further questions of a deeper nature. One question asked was, “As Sahaja Yogis, what should we desire?” Shri Mataji answered that we should seek our moksha, liberation and this could be achieved in two ways: through meditation and Sahaja Yoga work.

At Bundilla the hours of the day were spent in true Sahaja Yogi fashion, relaxing and becoming re-acquainted with old friends and making new ones. The camp was also a hive of activity: preparations were underway to transform the tent into the venue for Mahashivaratri Puja, musicians were preparing for the evening’s concert, the kitchen was throbbing to the beat of many hands labouring with love to provide us all with food, while the children played beneath clear skies and shining sun. We assembled at the pendal in the early evening under the light of the setting sun and awaited Shri Mataji. She arrived around 7:00 pm and took Her place upon the dais. She addressed us for a short time saying that She was very happy and that She would be speaking to us the next day.

The concert began with a performance by the children, beginning with bhajans sung by the children of the Dharamsala school in India. They performed a number of bhajans without reference to songbooks and totally captured the hearts of the audience with their innocence and sweetness. Their performance ended with an English song of devotion composed by one of the children which immersed us all within the sea of joy. The under six-year-olds then performed a very sweet play based on Lord Shiva which added sweetness upon sweetness. Shri Mataji was very pleased and commented on the beautiful growth and establishment of these children within Sahaja Yoga. The vibrations generated by this performance would be hard to surpass.

We next heard a selection of Western classical pieces performed on cello, violin, flute and oboe, ending with the classical arrangement of Binate Suniye. The next piece was a duet from The Magic Flute performed and sung in a manner much more in keeping with the spirit Mozart would have meant it to be performed, with the natural love and sweetness so much a part of the bond of love between brother and sister. In a word, the appreciation of the audience lifted the roof of the pendal.

The New Zealand national leader then read a four-part sonnet he had composed based on his experiences before and after self-realisation. He possesses a special gift of capturing in words the inexpressible feelings and emotions of we who have found ourselves part of the Divine plan. His words rang true as if he had written them for us all.

The concert ended with a performance of bhajans which was the perfect ending to a concert performed in the presence of the most perfect Being the universe has ever known.

Sunday, 3rd March, Mahashivaratri Puja
Sunday, Mahashivaratri Puja, a bright sun rises above the clear blue skies in Sydney. It is a day to remember, a day when with humble heart we offer salutation and homage to Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, a day when the Divine shines the clear light of truth within our souls and lifts us all into the sea of joy.

Shri Mataji arrived for Puja after mid-day. (See the synopsis of the talk earlier in this issue.) We were then allowed to worship Her in three aspects, first as Shri Ganesha which was performed by the children. She then retired for a short time, after which we worshipped Her as the Devi, and then as Lord Shiva. In the music and the Puja everything combined to create an atmosphere of completeness, of total and integrated joy and happiness which swept us all within its myriad folds.

Monday, 4th March, Public Program
The day was spent in preparation for the public program. Everything proceeded effortlessly and when Shri Mataji arrived 2,500 to 3,000 seekers had assembled. Shri Mataji’s discourse touched upon aspects of Her Puja talk. She spoke of the mind and the illusions it creates for us as individuals and for our society. She said that it had led us to misery, and that happiness and joy was the birthright of every human being.

She gave self-realisation as She does in India by asking everyone to place first the right hand, then the left hand above the fontanelle bone. The realisation happened effortlessly and within a few moments everyone felt the cool breeze. Shri Mataji then asked the children to come to the stage and to sing for the audience. It must have been a daunting task for the little ones, but like true ganas they rallied on stage, assembled before Shri Mataji and performed for us all. Shri Mataji was later to say that She was very happy with the program and that there were good seekers in the audience.

Tuesday, 5th March
Shri Mataji left the country for the continuation of Her South East Asian Tour. We had arranged a function room at the airport where we all awaited Her. She arrived and spoke to us all before leaving, saying that She was very happy with the tour and all the arrangements. She said that we should go out to all the villages and spread the word far and wide. She then left us for Taipei and Her children waiting there.

The first follow-up program was held the next day at a meeting room located at the venue of the public program. Two hundred people were in attendance. The vibrations were very strong and the program ended with a workshop on clearing the chakras.

— Chris Kyriacou, Australia

Our Place in the Virata — Australia and New Zealand
This is the first in a series of articles that will be featured in every issue of The Divine Cool Breeze. In this series, Sahaja Yogis from different countries will write about the spiritual role of their country in the Virata, based on comments made by Shri Mataji as well as their own observations. Readers are encouraged to write to The Divine Cool Breeze if they have any information or observations to add to what is published in the articles in this series. Such comments could be published in future issues.

Our Responsibility
On March 1, 1983, Shri Mataji said that it was the responsibility of Australians to understand that we have to maintain our purity of being. This is not limited only to the gross aspects. Our thoughts should be clear, we should shine with wisdom and beam with purity, “…the lustre of Shri Ganesha, the innocence of Shri Ganesha. His joy, the way He manifests joy. He is the source of all the joys of the world… You have to worship Him before any other Deity with the greatest sacrifices… I have to work hard, and you all have to work very hard to understand the importance of this country, your importance as Australians.” (Shri Ganesha Puja, Perth)

The Creation of Australia
Shri Mataji said, “It was said that a saint called Trishankar committed some mistakes and as a punishment he was given some land in the Bay of Bengal and was told to take that land away. As part of the rectification of that curse, he was told to take that land and make a heaven out of it. I have really seen that heaven where I went. Trishankar is nothing but your Southern Cross [constellation above Australia] and in Sanskrit your Southern Cross is known as the Trishankar. The parallel between this account in the Puranas and history is startling. Geology has shown that Australia and India were joined as part of the original land mass known as Gondwana Land. Australia was started as a penal colony where people were sent as punishment from England.” (Australian Tour, 3/90)

Spiritually Linked to Asia
In addition to its ancient relationship to India, Australia is also spiritually linked to other Asian countries. As the land of Shri Ganesha, whose seat is in the Mooladhara, Australia is also naturally associated with Christ and the Agnya, since Christ was a later incarnation of Shri Ganesha. Thus, Australia is spiritually connected to the countries which represent the Agnya, particularly the left Agnya, including China and the Southeast Asian countries. Many people in these countries worship Buddha, who is on the left Agnya. It is now Australia’s responsibility to help look after these countries (Easter Puja, Sydney, April 3, 94).

The Importance of Uluru
In the early 1980s, Shri Mataji said that Australia exists only because of Uluru, a very large swayambhu. Shri Mataji has said recently that Australia should provide food to the world.

Uluru, representing the centre of Mooladhara chakra, is in the shape of Shri Ganesha in a sleeping position and has a very strong, definite vibration. Uluru, formerly known as Ayers Rock, is the world’s largest single boulder, of which nine-tenths remains under the surface of the desert. Immediately adjacent and on one side of Uluru is the formation of rounded boulders known as the Olgas which have been noted by Shri Mataji to have a Motherly vibration. Mount Connor, a bit farther away on the opposite side of Uluru from the Olgas, is an angular, flat-topped mesa shaped like a bandhan. It has a Fatherly vibration. Yogis who have visited the red centre have made these same comments. The mountain ranges in central Australia were once as high as the Himalayas but over millennia have been worn down.

Shri Ganesha’s Special Ganas in the Land of Shri Ganesha
Australia is the only continent which looks red from outer space, red being Shri Ganesha’s colour.

At a Shri Ganesha Puja in Perth in February 1992, Shri Mataji stated that the nature should be imbibed within us and the balance should come in such a manner that our whole temperament should show that balance in us. “In this Ganesha land, you have to have complete balance within yourself. That is what I expect from the Sahaja Yogis of Australia, and they have to give to the whole world the sense of balance of Shri Ganesha…. While we are living on the ground of Shri Ganesha, how gentle we should be and in dealing with people you should be extremely gentle to show we are Ganesha’s special ganas. That’s what I feel about Australians.” Shri Ganesha’s Kundalini is in his Nabhi chakra which also means that he is very much concerned with balance.

In a puja talk in Canberra (April 14, 1991), Shri Mataji explained that Shri Ganesha was created at the gate of Hell to protect us from falling into Hell. “But actually when we insult Him and we do not care for Him [through problematic western behaviours], He just sleeps off. When that happens, any kind of possession can come and really make people mad… Shri Ganesha gives us maryadas, limits, which are innate within us, not imposed on us.” Shri Mataji advised that Australians should not copy any other country because we can lose our own personality that way. Shri Ganesha gives us maryadas, and it is only through maryadas that we get our personality.

A Multicultural Society Reflecting Collectivity
In 1994, Shri Mataji spoke about Australia’s many good points, one being that we belong to a multicultural society where other cultures are preserved and where people are helped through the justice system. This view reflects enlightened political thought and shows a sense of collectivity which is in our genes. All of these things are the manifestation of Shri Ganesha’s qualities (Easter Puja, Sydney, April 3, 1994).

Protective Genes
Shri Mataji discussed the indigenous people of Australia and Asia having extra genes compared to white people and these genes protect them against many sins. One gene protects them from the sins against the Father such as corruption, greed and abuses of power. The other gene protects them from the sins against the Mother which are the attacks on chastity, purity and innocence. The indigenous people, such as the Aborigines in Australia, have one of these genes so they have some protection. She said that after self-realisation the two extra genes are created in Sahaja Yogis and this is how we are protected against these sins (Sydney Picnic, May 5, 1994).

On Sydney
Sydney and the east coast represent the left Mooladhara of Australia. In 1981 during Shri Mataji’s first visit to Australia, She commented that the Parramatta River, bisecting the metropolitan area of Sydney roughly horizontally, had strong vibrations and was the Mahalakshmi power [of Sydney]. It has since been felt by yogis on vibrations that Lion Island at the entrance of the Hawkesbury River in the north marks the start of the Mahakali power and the St. George River in the south the Mahasaraswati power.

Shri Mataji said a few years ago that She didn’t understand why they called the city “Sydney”. The yogis were perplexed, wondering if it had a meaningful Aboriginal name, or if perhaps they were meant to find out more about this name “Sydney.” One possibility is that it may be named after Sir Phillip Sydney.

On a visit by ferry over the Sydney harbour to Taronga Zoo in 1981, Shri Mataji was overheard to say the Opera House is like seven bandhans. On this excursion Shri Mataji asked the ladies to remove Her shoes and stockings. She then placed Her feet on the ground and said something like, “Do you realise that this is the first time My Feet have touched Australian earth?”

On Melbourne
At the Puja to the Sea on March 12, 1983, Shri Mataji said the vibrations in Melbourne were very strong and that this place was the Sushumna Nadi of Australia. This was the puja where She put Her feet in the ocean and built a Shri Ganesha in the sand on the beach. When asked about the unpredictable weather patterns of Melbourne, Shri Mataji said that this area used to be under the sea and therefore it has an oceanic climate.

There is a folk story told by Aboriginals from this area having to do with a comet which comes rarely but brings with it great geological change. It is believed that this is the same comet that has just recently returned and has also been visible all over the world. It has been the subject of news reports worldwide. The first time the comet came, Tasmania broke off from the mainland (sometime during the ice age). The second time the comet came past, Port Phillip Bay was formed near Melbourne. Will there be a great geological effect from this latest appearance of the comet?

On Adelaide
It was recalled that, in perhaps 1983, Shri Mataji commented on Adelaide’s name, saying something like, “Adelaide – Ad – Adi – Adi Shakti,” with reference to laying the foundation of Adi Shakti or Kundalini. At about this time, it was asked whether there had ever been any Divine Incarnations in Australia. Shri Mataji replied there had never been any, since Adi Shakti Herself had to come.

On Perth
The west coast of Australia is the right Mooladhara of Australia and was once connected to India at the point in time when there was only one land mass. It was referred to as Gondwana Land. (The name Gondwana was coined by an Austrian geologist in the early part of this century, based on the name of an ancient tribe in India, the Gonds. Geologists also refer to this single land mass as Pangaea—pan meaning ‘all’, and gaia, ‘earth’.)

On the State of Tasmania
Tasmania is a very beautiful place. However, in the early 1980s, Tasmania was experiencing great difficulties in establishing Sahaja Yoga. Shri Mataji remarked that Tasmania was a gate of Hell. This island State used to be called Van Dieman’s Land and horrific atrocities against Aborigines were committed there. A few years ago, Shri Mataji was asked about Tasmania. At that time, She said She felt that someone could now go and establish Sahaja Yoga there.

On New Zealand
Shri Mataji has said New Zealand is the trunk of Shri Ganesha and represents the auspiciousness of the Mooladhara chakra.

1996 Asia Tour Report
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in Taiwan
March 5-8, 1996

Shri Mataji’s visits always brings prosperity to a country. Taiwan has been a perfect example of this. During two earlier visits, the view from Shri Mataji’s room was to the east of the city towards the domestic airport. Since then, the state imposed limit on air traffic has been lifted and the domestic traffic at this airport has increased from 2 to 4 starts and landings (mostly small turboprop planes) to 20 starts and landings of medium jets every hour. Desolate buildings along the freeway have been replaced by new high standard buildings. During each visit, She has said that people would better prosper with traditional Chinese culture than with the western modern style. At the times of crisis and tensions with Mainland China, Her visits and blessings have been most heartening.

Tuesday, March 5
Shortly before Shri Mataji’s arrival, the Sahaja Yogis performed Ganesha Puja in Shri Mataji’s hotel room. All Yogis arrived at the airport in time for Her arrival at 7:30 p.m. from Sydney via Hong Kong, ten minutes early. Shri Mataji was received by airport officials at the gate and guided through customs.

We got a view of Shri Mataji when we started taking mantras in our heart. When we started our collective welcome song together, She came out and received the flowers of the Yogis. While waiting for the car, She started talking to us about the successful programs in Australia and the Shivaratri Puja. As always, the weather welcomed Shri Mataji—rain cleared the air, then there was sunshine.

Arriving at the Lai Lai Sheraton Hotel, the PR manager and a photographer welcomed Shri Mataji. In the elevator She asked the manager about the age of the building, and he said that is was built in 1980. Upon arrival in the room first a garland of roses was presented, then the ladies performed Aarti.

The first night Shri Mataji was in Taiwan, there was an earthquake. We were on the 16th floor of the Lai-Lai Sheraton so you can imagine the scale of magnitude at such a height. The chandelier was shaking like a pendulum from the ceiling; it was quite scary. Shri Mataji gave a bandhan, and all was quiet after 3 or 4 minutes. Late that night, the after shock was less intense than expected. From the newspaper report the next day, we learned that it was 4.5 on the Richter scale in Taipei and 6.5 on the Pacific Ocean floor. About the earthquake, Shri Mataji said that the hotel was built at the site of a former torture prison of the military police. The souls of the people tortured in this place wanted to attract Her attention to them and receive liberation. She explained that if small to medium size earthquakes release tension regularly, a major one is prevented.

Wednesday, March 6
Shri Mataji received Yogis in the morning, and talked about the tension between Mainland China and Taiwan. She also checked the classified advertisements in the local paper, and noticed a lot of offers for native English speaking foreigners. She suggested that unemployed British Yogis should come here for a while. That should be of great help. To prepare, they should minimally take the one-month language teaching course and receive a certificate.

Lunch was in the Cantonese restaurant in the Hilton Hotel in a separate reserved room. There Shri Mataji explained about the soul—that it is the wrapping of the chakras, the inner lining of the nervous system. It gets awakened, enlightened when the Kundalini enters through the Brahmarandra. The brain is prism-shaped, so the division into three powers takes place. (Animals’ brains are flat, so there is no splitting into three powers). The Kundalini is “aware” of what happens. The Atma gives the identity. When the soul (jeeva) unites with the Atma, the Jeevatma forms. After death, the Kundalini goes back to the main force, but always finds the correct Jeevatma if a person takes rebirth.

Public Program
About 400 to 500 seekers attended the public program. In Her talk, Shri Mataji started by saying that truth is unchangeable, not transformable. It has to be felt on the central nervous system. That means bodh in Sanskrit, from where the word Buddha has come, or Vidya. It is not a mental feat or a mental understanding about truth. Shri Mataji spoke about many of the same points that She had made in the Shivaratri Puja talk in Sydney—that the mind is a myth. It is formed through our projections outside, and has been made through conditioning and ego. The mind is nothing but bubbles of thought. Brain is the reality. She also explained that in China, Lao-Tse talked on nothing but Sahaja Yoga. In Japan Vidhitama founded the Zen system. All tried to make human attention go beyond mind to reality.

In the middle of Her talk, after explaining briefly about self-realization, Shri Mataji paused and asked all those who did not want it to please leave the hall. Nobody left. She continued to tell about Sahaja Yoga, then gave realization quickly, just asking them to put their left and then their right hand towards Her, and to see if there was a cool breeze on the head. Most felt vibrations.

Afterwards She said the quality of seekers is more important than the quantity, and that She was quite satisfied. On the way back we looked at the lantern festival display, the Chinese version of Diwali. After the program Shri Mataji worked on left Vishuddhi, Agnya, and Nabhi.

Thursday, March 7
Local specialties were served for breakfast. Hsiao Lung Bao which means “small basket” and Tao Zi, a small date shaped fruit that has the texture of a pear. We were asked to bring big and small varieties of plants to India. That morning, a newspaper editor and the hotel manager came to visit Shri Mataji. The editor, who has already been meditating for two years, was complimented on the help he has rendered to Sahaja Yoga for advertisements. The manager received self-realization.

A small and wonderful miracle took place regarding a ring that Shri Mataji bought that had to be made wider. When the jeweller brought the ring in the evening, She tried to put it on Her back Agnya finger but it still did not fit. Then we decided to present the ring as a collective gift from Taiwan. Shri Mataji again tried to put the ring on Her finger and the ring immediately slipped on without any effort. Shri Mataji said that all the Deities were helping to make things happen because of our desire. Our love will change everything!

We had dinner in a fabulous restaurant at the invitation of the chairman of the Taiwan Power Company. The place offers beautiful wooden architecture and classical Chinese music entertainment for the guests. Shri Mataji first talked to the host, then gave the chairman of the School of Public Health of National Taiwan University a short program on Sahaja Yoga, including giving him self-realization. Shri Mataji inquired about the host’s albino child. She said that during pregnancy, the mother was too active and was thinking too much. This put pressure on the pineal body (the ego was taking over superego areas). Because the functioning of the pineal body was impaired, melanin was not produced and the child became an albino. The mother, who is in charge of the planning department of a major bank, agreed to this description of the situation during her pregnancy. The whole family then received self-realization.

Friday, March 8
Shri Mataji canceled a scheduled TV interview because She objected to the TV crew charging money. Later in the day, She received the Taipower chairman and his family to treat their albino child. The lack of melanin in the retina of the eye of an albino blurs the vision. She told them how to work out the child’s problem, then gave vibrations to the child’s back Agnya chakra. She sweated during the process from absorbing the heat. Then She asked the child to test his vision which had already improved. She told them to continue with right side treatment for both the child and the mother. After that, Shri Mataji received the Yogis and talked to them.

Talk to the Yogis
Shri Mataji first requested photographs of all the Yogis with date of realization, birth, and names. She said that there will be many more yogis after this year’s public program, as there were also nice articles in the press. She then gave advice on how to handle new people.

“Now the way You handle them is very important. We have to be extremely kind and patient with them, not to say you have these chakras, and bhoots…. That will frighten them. But You should know yourself what chakras are catching among yourselves. We should talk in Sahaja language, so that they don’t feel embarrassed or hurt, because you know so much about Sahaja Yoga.”

“The whole situation is very simple—that we are talking about love, the Divine Love. The Divine Love does not get attached to something. Love works for everyone and it is not attached, like the sap in the tree. It goes into the tree and supplies to every part of the tree and then evaporates. But suppose this sap gets attached to one flower or fruit, the whole tree will die. So one has to understand that this is the birth of Divine Love, the power of love.”

“So we have to appear very lovable and we should not react. Just keep peaceful. Supposing they say something bad, just keep peaceful. That way in Taiwan it will now grow faster. You have to have a very balanced way and a balanced life. There is nothing compulsory in Sahaja, but it happens automatically. So one should not try to be harsh to anyone. Try to be kind and sweet and things will work out. And also you can write to Me whenever you have problems.”

On mainland China and Taiwan: “Taiwan people have to understand that with a giant like China sitting there, you cannot live separate. They could always eat you off in no time. But the best way is to understand that they are Chinese and you are Chinese. To become one motherland is a good idea. Of course, mainland China should like to keep Taiwan as it is—democratic, and keep you the way you are. But these (local) politicians, they are the ones who are ambitious. That is why they want to retain power for themselves. That is why they want to separate—so they can go abroad, you see, they can enjoy the power. It is dangerous, very dangerous.”

“Our country (India) was divided into so many parts. First was Burma, and the people who asked that they should get Burma became the dictators, horrible dictators, and there is a big problem for the people there. I do not know how they are surviving. Now if they would be with India, nothing we could have taken away from them, but they could have been protected and guided better. Then there is Bangladesh where they are the poorest now. Then we have, say Pakistan, no growth, no industrial growth. They are just fighting all the time. Then we have Tibet, also now gone to China. So division does not help in any country. It can never help.”

“The people of Taiwan should say that we will accede to China, but they should keep our democracy intact. The growth of this country gave Me tremendous joy, but it is very westernized, while China still has the Chinese culture. You will prosper better with that culture than with this western culture. You do not need to form any political party. You do not have to form anything. But you should desire that people have more wisdom. All the children, all the people can be killed in a war. War we do not want. I like the Chinese—even from the Mainland they are very nice people. As long as you respect them, they are very nice…. We must understand in ourselves what we want is nothing but somehow to become one with the Mainland.”

“Sahaja Yogis should take to wisdom and not to extreme sort of ideas. Don’t worry, no war will come. Nothing can happen to you. So now be happy, nothing will happen to you here. Thank you very much. Next time I come I know I will see many more.” Shri Mataji then vibrated sugar with Her hands, and water with Her Feet.

Observations by Shri Mataji while in Taiwan

Shri Mataji now is short listed for the Nobel Peace prize.
The new Australian president is a good person.
Li Peng is a good man. He sent his cultural attaché in Austria to meet Shri Mataji, who advised Her to approach the Chinese officials through the great medical benefits of Sahaja Yoga.
Shri Mataji is not very happy with the American public because they are not seeking spirituality as other countries are. In the U.S., only the college education is still a very dynamic program; otherwise everything else is coming down.
In Beijing at the women’s conference last September, She received a red carpet treatment. The driver always protected Her head when She entered the car, and he even came to attend to Her on his wedding day.
Shri Mataji was asked about Deepak Chopra from TM who copies Sahaja material and sells it. She said that this should be made public.
People who are catching both on the right and left sides should use a candle in front of the Photograph, keep their eyes open, and footsoak intensively. They should also say the Nirvichara mantra. In general, Sahaja Yogis should use the Shri Nirvichara mantra to get into thoughtless awareness quickly.
When asked what to do about tensions, Shri Mataji responded, “You must meditate. In the morning, night. Give bandhan.”
Calcium can be used as a right side treatment to cool the body. However, this should be done discreetly as the sodium-calcium balance in the body is very delicate.
During dinner one evening, Shri Mataji noted that beef creates swelling of the gums because of the antibiotics and hormones that are put into the animals. (This is one more reason we should not eat beef.)
Departure
At the airport we proceeded directly to the elevator to the passport control area. We had just enough time to present a garland to the Feet of Shri Mataji and to bow and take Her leave when She was brought into the passport control area. By mistake, Shri Mataji was escorted to the wrong side, so we were able to have Her darshan a little longer.

Shri Mataji’s visit to Hong Kong
March 8-11, 1996

Preparations
The preparations for Shri Mataji’s visit began three months before Her arrival. The venue was booked for Sunday, March 10th and this was later changed to Saturday, March 9th. Unfortunately, the original venue was unavailable so a search was undertaken to no avail. There were no venues available due to the Hong Kong Arts Festival. After many bandhans it was suggested that we look further away from Hong Kong centre to the New Territories. Shatin, a satellite city of more than one million people was suggested. We rang the Shatin Town Hall and the auditorium was available in the evening. After inspection, it became clear that it was much better than the original venue and it was obviously a play of Shri Mataji.

With limited funds we concentrated on posters and media interest to publicize the visit. We decided to use the same poster design as last year as it had been extremely successful. All the invitations, advertisements and brochures had followed a similar format.

With Chinese New Year celebrations in late February all the printed materials had to be finished early, as the printers have two weeks holiday. Over Chinese New Year the yogis postered all over Hong Kong. It was the coldest Chinese New Year since 1946. During the celebrations there is a large flower show which provided a perfect opportunity to distribute invitations and brochures on Sahaja Yoga. Posters were mounted on placards to attract attention. We had printed 18,000 invitations and managed to distribute 3,000 at the show.

Another opportunity presented itself in the form of an exhibition on new age subjects called “Wheel of Fortune”. It included alternative medicine, fortune telling, and a selection of other new age therapies and literature. A Sahaja Yogini has a brother who runs an alternative health clinic and health food shop. He has his realization and comes to programs when he can, and often helps with Sahaja Yoga promotions. He said that we could put invitations and brochures in his stand. The cost of the stands was around US$ 2,000 which we could not afford so we were very pleased. As it turned out we managed to set our own stand up and proceeded to give realization to any who came along. Over 200 people received realization over the three days of the show. This is the first time an exhibition of this kind has been in Hong Kong so the place was full of seekers.

The media in Hong Kong has always been interested in things that help improve the health and quality of life. Through friends and personal contacts we managed to get an article written for the South China Morning Post which is the major English daily in Hong Kong. The reporter, an Indian who had grown up in Hong Kong, came to the ashram to interview the yogis a week before Shri Mataji’s visit. She was very skeptical at first as she had seen the false gurus and how they made money from people. The Yogis were photographed and, after many questions, she finally agreed to have the experience. She was a very nervous person who has suffered from chronic asthma since childhood. Her Kundalini rose, she felt the cool breeze, and for a few short moments she became thoughtless. She also noticed that her chest was more relaxed.

The article appeared on Wednesday, March 6th in a weekly feature on health. It was very well written and generated a lot of interest in the program. I rang the reporter to thank her for writing such a good article and she said that after having realization she had been meditating every day and was feeling fantastic. She hadn’t needed her Ventolin for her asthma which she normally uses every day. She said that she was also looking forward to Shri Mataji’s program.

Shri Mataji Arrives
Shri Mataji arrived from Taiwan with three accompanying yogis, all carrying beautiful bunches of flowers. Shri Mataji looked radiant with such a beaming smile. She looked very happy to see so many people at the airport to greet Her. The yogis presented flowers one by one and She talked to the children. It was the climax of weeks of preparation and anticipation of Her arrival.

On the way to the hotel Shri Mataji spoke about the Australian tour and said that everything had worked out well. The puja was tremendous and She had given a very significant speech that we must listen to. We had made arrangements for Shri Mataji to stay at the Furama Hotel on the Hong Kong Island side. The suite was very private and had a separate dining and sitting room. We had a food preparation area with an adjoining bed room, ideal for looking after Shri Mataji. Two Chinese yoginis did aarti on Her arrival at the hotel, wearing traditional silk embroidered costumes. Shri Mataji was very pleased to be in Hong Kong.

She spoke about the program in Taiwan and said that the people who came were very deep. Not so many, 150-200, but of a high quality (about 100 people attended the follow ups). The situation between China and Taiwan has been made worse with the attitude of the Taiwan president. He has no diplomacy and has offended the Chinese. She spoke at length on a number of occasions about the Chinese government and how they should change to a more democratic system. They should gradually change, and should learn from Hong Kong and Taiwan.

The weather had suddenly become cold again in Hong Kong. This is very unusual for this time of year but Shri Mataji said that She was cooling down the right side of the Chinese. Shri Mataji complained about the number of smokers in Taiwan and Hong Kong and suffered throat problems during the first two days of Her visit. We had to take vibrations from Her Vishuddhi to relieve the pressure. You could feel such a power of vibrations moving through the hand, arms, and body and the pulsation at Shri Mataji’s Vishuddhi.

Saturday, March 9
The morning started early as some of the yogis were interviewed on the English radio station. The interviewer was not prepared and rambled, asking fairly irrelevant questions, but overall the interview went well. At least we were able to mention the program in the evening.

On our return to the hotel Shri Mataji asked how the interview had gone and we described the interview. She said that is typical of the media. A local TV station had arranged to interview Shri Mataji but we got a call to say that their car had broken down. Later in the morning we went shopping.

In the evening seekers were queuing for the public program at about 7:00. By 8:00 the auditorium was almost full, with more than 1,000 people in attendance. We commenced with bhajans and the audience started to respond. The bhajan group had been practising for weeks in preparation for the program. There were a lot of local Chinese but the group was reinforced by a few imports from around the world. An introduction on Sahaja Yoga was given and we were expecting Shri Mataji to come by 8:30. More songs and then more and more. It was 8:50 and you could sense that the audience was becoming a little restless. At 9:00 p.m. more words on Sahaja Yoga and a request to the audience to be patient.

Finally at 9:30 Shri Mataji arrived, in a white sari with a beaming smile. The vibrations were tremendous. She apologized for being late as the traffic from Hong Kong island had been very slow. Her talk was beautiful and very relevant for the Chinese. She mentioned the hectic life people lead in Hong Kong and how business was not the only important thing in life.

She had the audience’s absolute attention from the time She walked in. They were laughing and amused as She described how you cannot pay for your self-realization. At many times during the program we could see Shri Mataji’s eyes filled with tears of compassion as She looked out across the sea of rapt faces. The realization process was very simple: both hands were pointed toward Shri Mataji and then people bent their heads and felt above their heads. There was complete silence and you could feel that the audience was in meditation. Shri Mataji asked everyone to raise both hands and ask the question, “Is this the power of the love of God?” The vibrations were incredibly strong and just about everyone received their realization.

Shri Mataji was very pleased and She said that the quality of seekers was excellent. She said that a lot of them had the Kundalini awakened when She entered the auditorium. It goes to show how effective bhajans are at activating Kundalini. Jogwa was sung before Shri Mataji arrived.

Shri Mataji returned to the hotel and we spent a few hours taking out vibrations. She said that there were seekers at the program who had been to false gurus. In Her compassion She had cleared all the seekers, working tirelessly to liberate Her children from ignorance. When we see Shri Mataji working like this it puts into perspective what small amount of work we do for Sahaja Yoga in comparison.

The next day over breakfast Shri Mataji spoke about predictions and said that She had predicted many things which have now been proven. The protein cells which trigger cancer were predicted by Shri Mataji more than twenty years ago. Diseases like AIDS and other diseases She had also spoken of twenty years ago. She said that all of Her predictions would be proven within twenty-five years, and had to be within the lifetime of the yogis so they would have more meaning. She said that She was very practical.

She went on to describe the predictions of people like Nostradamus, saying that they were very vague and not very accurate. She said that he was only concerned with wars, calamities and political predictions—a very limited perspective. The accuracy of such predictions is questionable because they were very general and open to interpretation. There was a great sage called Brigu Muni who had prophesied Shri Mataji’s advent, describing how the Adi Shakti would incarnate and give moksha to Her devotees. The activation of this power would be in 1970 which is when Shri Mataji opened the Sahasrara. The great sage worshipped Lord Shiva and when both Shiva and Parvati appeared before him he only wanted to do bandhan around Lord Shiva. Shri Shiva said that He is one with His Shakti and the Goddess is absorbed in His body, with one side of His face female and the other male. The great sage was very obstinate and still refused. Finally, using his powers he turned himself into a beetle, entered Shiva’s navel and circled only half of Lord Shiva’s body.

Shri Mataji also spoke of William Blake and how his predictions about Sahaja Yoga in England were very detailed and have all come true. One described a house above a brook and a bridge shaped like a boat. In one of Shri Mataji’s houses, when the foundations were excavated, a brook and an ancient bridge shaped like a ship were discovered hidden under the house.

She explained the past and future and described it in a sketch. She drew a circle and said that we were at the top of the circle. The future was coming in a clockwise direction and the past was moving away. After realization we moved above the top of the circle so that our perspective was wider. She said that it was much easier to know the past than to predict the future. Shri Mataji said She is far above the circle and can see everything.

[Image: Diagram showing a circle. Top point is labeled “Sahaja Yogis’ awareness”. Below that point on the circle is “Normal human awareness”. Left side of the circle is labeled “Future” with an arrow pointing clockwise towards the top. Right side is labeled “Past” with an arrow pointing clockwise away from the top.]

Later in the morning we went to Stanley Market, and after about an hour we went for lunch which was arranged with all the Sahaja Yogis. The restaurant is on the beach at Repulse Bay. We were inside and occupied most of the restaurant with at least five large tables. Every year we seem to be increasing in size and Shri Mataji commented on the number of new faces.

Shri Mataji really likes Chinese food and She even uses chopsticks. She was seated on a table with all the Chinese yogis around Her. The food was Cantonese style which included a variety of seafood. Most of the food is lightly stir fried or steamed and is always very fresh. Shri Mataji said that it is very healthy but said that the Chinese eat too much fish. Over lunch the children in the collective presented Her with a gift, a carved wooden box with jade inserts. She was delighted with it and commented on the sweetness of the children. She also gave a new baby the name of Gautama, after the Buddha. He was such a happy boy and as Shri Mataji held him he smiled at Her and laughed. He certainly picked the right time to come to earth, What a blessing! All too quickly the lunch was over and it was time for Shri Mataji to leave.

In the evening we arranged a music program at the hotel. Shri Mataji had slept in the afternoon and was very fresh. All the yogis gathered to sing bhajans. Before the music began, She answered questions. She said that in general if there were questions related to doubting Sahaja Yoga then people needed to meditate and also give the experience to others. She also spoke of Zen and how the tea ceremony was a way to become thoughtless. She related a story about when She was in Japan with Sir C.P. and they went to see the tea ceremony with a large group of American tourists. They called for volunteers and, as Shri Mataji knew what was about to happen, She kept quiet. Everyone wanted to be picked and finally a couple came forward to do the ceremony. The wife took one sip and said, “Oh, my God,” and when the husband took a sip he got so angry he threw the cup down and smashed it. He then screamed abuse at the organizers and a big fight ensued. Shri Mataji said that there are two cups of tea—one extremely bitter quinine raised to power 108, and the other extremely sweet. She said that when you taste something like that you immediately go thoughtless. The other specialty was the Zen garden which was so simple but arranged in such a meditative way so you could go thoughtless. She mentioned that there had been no Zen realized soul for hundreds of years.

The other point Shri Mataji made was that the yogis are too attached to Christ, Buddha, Mohammed and others, but that She is here now and they are not. We have to understand that the incarnation of the Adi Shakti is sitting before us and we must recognize Her. She has given us self-realization and no other has done so. “What has Buddha given? Where is He? He didn’t give realization!”

She went on to discuss about diet and She recommended that all the Chinese do right sided treatment with ice on the head and left hand holding ice on the liver, with the right foot in a cold footsoak. One very relevant question Shri Mataji selected was from a yogini who described the wonderful benefits she had felt after realization, but who now wondered why the effects were decreasing. Shri Mataji explained that in order to maintain the level of well-being in ourselves we need to put our attention onto others, by spreading Sahaja Yoga, and asked the yogini how many people had she given realization to.

Some bhajans were sung by everyone and Shri Mataji was very pleased. A Chinese bhajan was sung and Shri Mataji said that it was very beautiful and the composer, a new, young yogi, was very deep. It is the first Sahaja Yoga Chinese song. The words are:

In my life, the most beautiful moment:
The lotus is in blossom, Your gentle steps are there in the flower,
Awakening our compassion
My heart is filled with joy, don’t ask me what sorrow is.
The happiness in my heart is for ever our own.
In this beautiful world of integration, filled with light
We care for each other, no difference between self and others
The world is filled with compassion.

Following the Chinese song, Shri Mataji described the similarities between the scales used in Chinese music and certain Indian ragas. She asked Lyndon to play Raga Bhairavi, and we were all amused when he apologized, saying that he had been so busy trying to learn Mandarin that his music practice had suffered. Graciously, Shri Mataji took the harmonium and played the raga, then improvised a little to the wonderment of all present.

Shri Mataji was presented a gift from the Hong Kong collective—a pair of fine, white porcelain bowls. When a light is placed inside the bowls a design of two dragons appears. She commented on the artistic nature of the Chinese and praised them for all the art they have produced. A book and painting was also presented by Lyndon from Beijing. The book was about a young Chinese painter who paints mostly tigers. Shri Mataji was very impressed by his work. She then presented everyone with presents, beautiful cloisonné chopsticks, and gifts for the children. The time had come for Shri Mataji to retire for the night. She thanked everyone, praised all the yogis for their work and encouraged everyone to go deeper. We did collective namaskar and She blessed us all.

Monday, March 11
Shri Mataji left from the hotel for the last time on Monday morning. To our delight She had requested a later flight, but unfortunately no seats were available. All the yogis had gathered at the airport to say farewell and offer flowers. Shri Mataji promised to come again next year when She hopes also to go to mainland China, Indonesia, and Vietnam.

Follow-ups
Our first follow-up programs (two venues) were very well attended with more than 180 people returning. This number was repeated the second week, too! Both venues were so full that some yogis had to wait outside.

— Alex Henshaw, Hong Kong

Shri Mataji’s Visit to Malaysia
March 11-14, 1996

Monday, 11 March
The day began with continued preparations for Shri Mataji’s visit later in the evening. For approximately two weeks, active publicity efforts were undertaken in the form of press articles or features, advertisements and posters. Seven newspapers had written something on Sahaja Yoga, ranging from five-line announcements to full-page features complete with colour photo of Shri Mataji. Dedicated postering teams also saw that the city of Kuala Lumpur and other towns were vibrated by pictures of Our Holy Mother’s smiling face.

A group of yogis and yoginis had been gathering daily in the leader’s home for the two weeks leading up to Shri Mataji’s arrival to construct Shri Mataji’s suite, as well as to participate in decorations, flower arrangements, clean-up, etc. The vibrations of this collective work were tremendous!

The finishing touches to all the decorations and arrangements were being made until minutes before Shri Mataji’s arrival. In the meantime, about 200 yogis of the Malaysian Collective were gathered in the Subang International Airport at 5 p.m. to welcome our Divine Mother. Prior arrangements had been made to enable a group of yogis to go into the Arrival Area and greet Shri Mataji in a VIP room while Her luggage and passport were cleared. There was an air of respectful silence and anticipation as we awaited Shri Mataji’s arrival in the VIP room, but outside excited yogis were busy getting in line, receiving last-minute instructions from the dynamic Yuva Shakti force.

Shri Mataji was the last to disembark, and Her smile as She gazed upon us lifted all our hearts. While waiting for the luggage to clear, Shri Mataji rested and chatted with us in the VIP room. Upon hearing that the Malaysian Muslims were Sunnis, not Shiites, our Divine Mother remarked that they were now very difficult to handle. She also put Her attention on the Malaysian economy, and also on the layout and architectural style of airports around the world. The successes of the Taiwan and Hong Kong public programs were also mentioned. Her children who were present there followed Her lead in the conversation delightfully.

Shri Mataji emerged from the VIP room 45 minutes after Her arrival to the resounding sound of conches. Two long lines of Sahaja Yogis greeted Her with flowers all the way to Her car. Our Holy Mother rested that night in Her suite after speaking for a while with the leader and a few others. She saw the press articles on Sahaja Yoga and was very pleased to hear that one of the reporters got her realization and had started meditating. She also graciously gave precious advice on an ideal design of a house, which took into account all aspects of layout, architecture, materials, etc.

Tuesday, 12 March, 1996
Shri Mataji spent the morning resting. In the afternoon, She continued Her discussion of a master plan for a house. She explained many aspects, including the importance of suitability of the design to the climate, as well as the requirement for balance between the need for common areas and privacy for the occupants. We can only absorb this precious Attention with the fullest gratitude.

Meanwhile, the yogis were busy in the Kolej Damansara Utama Hall in preparation for the public program. Due to the amazing number of phone inquiries from the press articles on Sahaja Yoga, it was decided that a large screen should be placed on the stage to present a good view to those seated at the back of the hall. Also, for the benefit of all who were late and could not fit into the hall, two 25-inch TVs were placed outside to relay “live” all that was happening in the hall. The public program was also covered by a local Tamil TV magazine show.

At approximately 7:40 p.m., the bhajan group was on stage, ready to begin. Then an interesting (and hilarious) leela started involving the microphones. There were four mikes on stage for the singers and musicians, and all were reported to be functioning perfectly at 6 p.m. when they were tested. When the bhajans were about to begin, however, first one mike would work, then it would not, then another mike which was previously dead would be alright. This went on for about 15 minutes. Covert bandhans were done, and finally the singing began, despite the fact that not all the mikes were operating properly. Jai Mangalamurti was sung, followed by Ai Giri Nandini. The latter song had an interesting effect—most of the seekers clapped along enthusiastically, while a handful left the hall. (We wondered if these were followers of the false guru we were denouncing.) Then, a yogini gave the introductory talk, at the end of which the sound of conches filled the air. Everyone stood as Shri Mataji walked through the crowd and up onto the stage. The Yuva Shakti held hands to form a chain to keep the aisle free for Our Holy Mother.

Shri Mataji requested a song, and the much-practised Powada was sung heartily to welcome Shri Adi Shakti. Then a hushed silence was present in the hall as Shri Mataji spoke. She explained the importance of growth in our internal beings, and how the gift of self-realization should not be wasted. She said that human life is precious and its full meaning should be achieved. Then we were all asked to put our hands out towards Her and the vibrations flowed, wafting breezes of Divine Love that enveloped all of us. It was a moving experience to see the 2,000 pairs of raised hands of all those who had just received their second birth.

Just before leaving the stage, Shri Mataji blessed all of us, saying that She would return again next year, and invited the new Sahaja Yogis to the Ganapatipule Seminar. This lot of new seekers seemed very deep. By the looks on some faces, they have recognized Shri Mataji. A few were openly praying to Her. Perhaps the green land of Malaysia will rise to its full glory now.

Wednesday, 13 March
Shri Mataji wanted to do a little shopping this morning so we soon found ourselves in the centre of a shopping area. In one shop, some senior supervisors came and showered us with attention. One was particularly chatty and talked constantly, asking us about Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga. This supervisor was persistently asking us to have a drink or something to eat in the cafeteria upstairs. We declined as graciously as we could several times, but then she finally asked Shri Mataji. Shri Mataji said, “You are asking with such love, so how can we say no?”

Not long after that, we were escorted up to the cafeteria in a reserved lift, and Cecilia left us to another senior supervisor who took very good care of our food. Some of us did not know what to do, for we certainly did not expect to sit and eat at the same table as the Adi Shakti. Shri Mataji sensed this, and put us at ease, inviting us to sit and eat. It felt quite strange sitting next to the Creator of the Universe and having lunch, reminding ourselves not to vibrate the food because everything was prasad in Shri Mataji’s presence.

Before we could finish our lunch, Cecilia made another appearance, with other people in tow. She asked for her realization, then introduced other supervisors to Shri Mataji. They all got their realization, and none had a clue as to how fortunate they were. Shri Mataji worked on them individually and said that all the supervisors had Agnya catches. She put Her hand on their Agnyas and Sahasraras, massaging them until the catches cleared.

How lucky these people were! Just the night before, 2,000 people had seen Shri Mataji, wanted to touch Her, be with Her, but had no chance. Today here were these people being personally worked on by the Adi Shakti, and they didn’t even know it. We can only hope that they appreciated it and will come for the follow-ups. Soon, too many people were coming towards us and looking to get blessings from Shri Mataji, so we decided to move on.

That evening, Shri Mataji met with reporters from the Sun and the Star newspapers, both of which had carried articles on Shri Mataji’s visit. This was the first time in Malaysia that the media got the opportunity to meet and speak to Her. The egos of the reporters were quickly melted by Shri Mataji’s warmth and compassion. They later commented that they had met their fair share of gurus, but had never met and spoken to anyone like Shri Mataji who was so graceful, compassionate, kind and motherly. They were like children listening to what She had to say, and after a while, Shri Mataji also said that they could not ask any more questions because they were in thoughtlessness and couldn’t think of any more questions. They were very respectful and Shri Mataji spoke to them for an hour and a half.

The questions asked ranged from the mundane to the very deep. One that was truly notable was, “Shri Mataji, how do you feel when your followers treat you like God?” Shri Mataji replied that whatever Her followers call Her, they have found out of their own accord, and thus cannot be challenged. She said that the powers of the Goddess have been described in many ancient writings, and when they found that She had these powers, they started to call Her Goddess, so what can she do? She did not ask anyone to address Her in that way. Nobody challenged Her or said anything. They all seemed to accept what She said without any doubt. Shri Mataji later went on to criticize and expose all the false gurus, including Mahishasura, the Catholic Church, T.M., Rajneesh, B.K. Raja Yoga, the Dalai Lama, and even Mother Teresa.

It was a very powerful talk, and we were left floating after that. Shri Mataji later commented that the reporters were now like Sahaja Yogis also, just listening to Her talk. She told them how powerful they were as members of the Press, and asked them to use these powers well, so that the message could be spread in the best way. They were also asked not to publish everything She had said. She told them that much of what She had said was for their own benefit. They acknowledged that and said they would do their best.

Thursday, 14 March
The following morning, Shri Mataji saw the Malaysian Collective at the hall where we have our regular main collective meetings. It was well decorated and everyone sang Shri Mataji, We Love You as She arrived. Conches announced Her coming and little children presented Her with flowers of welcome.

Shri Mataji spoke to us for about an hour, talking about the problems of pollution in the country and how we needed to learn to car pool and give bandhans to the problem. She told us how powerful bandhans were, and how we should put our attention on problems faced by the country, give a collective bandhan, and see how things work out.

Shri Mataji also talked about how we should have faith that She would work things out, that we could write Her a letter and leave it in front of Her photo, and whatever problems that we faced could be solved. She also told us to take care of the new people.

After we presented Her with our gifts, She allowed us to celebrate Her birthday early with a cake. Then, all too soon, it was time to drive Shri Mataji to the airport. From then on, time seemed to fly. One moment She was sitting there, and the next She was waving good-bye to us, the sound of the cheer Bolo Shri Adi Shakti Mataji Shri Nirmala Devi Ki Jai! echoing through the airport, announcing the presence of the Devi.

We milled around a bit, some chatting, some crying, all missing our Divine Mother, but knowing that another collective would be waiting in eager anticipation of Shri Mataji’s arrival. The four days She was here seemed so short, but they were full of blessings, joy and memories to cherish for ever. Most of all, we were all given a great boost in our ascent, both individually as well as collectively.

Postscript
Follow-up programs have begun, and once in full swing, will be held in 20 centres all over the country. So far, centres which have begun programs report between 5 and 50 new people coming for follow-ups, with more to come.

Although Shri Mataji has physically left the country, we feel Her presence still. She has touched us all. Those who saw Her for the first time will not forget the occasion, and those of us who have seen Her before have felt changes within ourselves, for She has put Her Attention on each of us at various times, whether we have felt it or not. We pray that the Divine Goddess will bless us again with Her presence in years to come.

Shri Mataji’s Visit to Thailand
March 14-16, 1996

Greetings to you all from Thailand. As requested, we are now sending you the good news about Shri Mataji’s recent visit to Thailand.

Shri Mataji arrived in Thailand on 14th March and we met Her at the VIP reception area of Bangkok airport. Shri Mataji was welcomed by the wife of Dr. Satin, one of the Deputies in the Parliament, whose party is called Palang Tham which means “the energy of Dharma.” This party is one of the very few honest political parties in Thailand and was very popular during previous general elections. Dr. Satin also last year arranged the VIP room, welcomed Shri Mataji himself at the airport, attended the program and was received personally by Shri Mataji in Her room.

It had been pre-arranged by Dr. Satin that Shri Mataji would go to the Parliament to meet with and to talk to the President of the Parliament and some of his Deputies. She went straight from the airport to the Parliament.

The President, when he first saw Shri Mataji, had no idea why he was to see this lady and formally he started the conversation by asking Shri Mataji if She had come to visit Thai temples. Shri Mataji replied, “I am not here to visit temples, but to build temples in the heart of human beings.” This immediately ended the formality and everyone in the room could feel that the conversation came to another level of attention. For the next ten minutes (which the President said was the only time he could spare) the brilliant presentation from Shri Mataji about Sahaja Yoga kept the audience captivated. At the end of the ten minutes, Shri Mataji asked the President to put his hands towards Her: his whole face changed as he felt the cool breeze. The interpreter, who had been, since the beginning, very interested and enthusiastic, also showed tremendous joy to have tried and felt this special experience.

Instead of the ten minutes the President could spare, he went on to spend an hour and a half with Shri Mataji. At one point, Shri Mataji asked if She could work on his Agnya and She stood up to touch his Agnya and Sahasrara. He then said that he could feel extremely peaceful and relaxed, as he had been so worried and stressed about deadlines, etc., but now he felt above it all. He then came to understand that Shri Mataji had come specially to grant him this inner peace and self-realization. He even said that if he had known the importance of Shri Mataji’s visit, he would have arranged for Her to speak to the whole Parliament.

The following evening was the public program in the ballroom of the Rembrandt Hotel where Shri Mataji was staying. There were about 650 people attending the program (2,500 was later reported in one of the main English newspapers in Thailand!). Dr. Satin introduced Shri Mataji at the program very warmly and wholeheartedly, saying that he was very happy to learn that “Mother” has come again to search for Her children, to give them special knowledge and to help the people of Thailand.

After the talk Shri Mataji asked the audience to stretch their hands towards Her and to check their Kundalinis above their heads instead of going through the whole realization process. Shri Mataji was very pleased with the quality of the seekers. At the end of the program, the people did not want to leave the hall as their interest was so strong and they wanted to get closer to Shri Mataji. A lot of people came to offer Shri Mataji flowers, among them, the Ambassador of Russia and his wife, and the Ambassador of Nepal. Shri Mataji took time talking to the Russian Ambassador, praising the quality of the Russian seekers.

On the 16th in the evening, Shri Mataji held a press conference. This was highly successful and as a result, glowing reports on Sahaja Yoga have appeared in the local Thai and English newspapers with large photographs of Shri Mataji.

Shri Mataji then talked to the local Sahaja Yogis (details of the talk follow report), with the reporters still taking notes and photographs. She very graciously answered questions, giving bhandans and treatments as requested! One Sahaja Yogi child spontaneously went up in front of the reporters and asked Shri Mataji if She would allow us to see miracles on Her photographs being taken that evening. Shri Mataji gave the little one a sweet smile and She went on giving advice on how to handle the new people after the program.

There were two follow-up programs in the first week after Shri Mataji’s program, with more than 100 people at each program. At our regular Thursday evening program at the Centre we had eight new people and various people from the follow-ups. The third week we started an 8-week course, and we still had in excess of 60 people. We are continuing to get lots of new people who have seen the articles in the newspapers from the press conferences which Shri Mataji gave here in Bangkok. Now, after the fifth week, there are still 30-40 people coming to the regular programs.

— Your brothers and sisters in Bangkok

Shri Mataji’s Talk to Sahaja Yogis in Thailand
“I am very happy to see that there are already so many Sahaja Yogis. Yesterday you saw how many came. It’s very heartening so see that. They have to settle down now and not come and go. But we really need people of depth, otherwise it doesn’t work out. At the beginning, of course, you will find people coming who are not so deep, just superficial, going to many gurus, like that. And some of them think that if they can purchase the guru, it’s a good idea. But still I must say that Sahaja Yoga grows very fast and as it starts growing you get people who are better and better.

So you must have patience to begin with. You know that our work is from Divine Love, it is love and compassion. You cannot argue, you cannot fight. If somebody starts arguing, just give up, don’t argue because you have to go beyond your mental level. Be very kind, very gentle with all others, not to say immediately what’s wrong with them, like “You have a bhoot in you” or something like this. Even the chakras you need not say what’s wrong with the chakras. You can only show your fingers. And when you are working on somebody, don’t touch anyone. Before working on them at least give a big bandhan to yourself seven times. Also for whom you are working you can give bandhan. Supposing somebody is talking to someone, somebody else should go to the back and work on them from the back. Because in the beginning they don’t want anyone to raise their Kundalini or do something. So the best is to do it from the back.

You see, it will depend on you, how you behave if they take to Sahaja Yoga. It is your responsibility now. I am sure I will come next year again, but before that I have to tell you that you have to show tremendous patience. Because you all have got it, they have not got it. You have nothing to lose but they will be lost. So you have to be careful with them—very important to save people. You see around how the world is going into a very bad situation, and you cannot tell them, “Don’t do this, don’t do that.” Only with the light of the spirit they can be alright.

So the main thing is that you give them realization and let them feel confident so that they will know that they can also become like you. See, for example, if somebody says, “I cannot do it, this and that…” you should say, “I was like you also.” You should not hurt them. They are already suffering and we should use now all our compassion for them. I know that it looks like we are very few but even one person can give to thousands.

Medical Conferences in China, Japan and the Philippines
April–May 1996

A great and successful three-country tour presenting Sahaja Yoga in medical conferences in the Philippines, China, and Japan has just been completed. All three events are reported below, showing some of the far-reaching and subtle effects that collective attention in this direction have produced.

Manila, The Philippines
The Manila conference was held on Friday, April 19, 1996. To put this event in context, some background information about Sahaja Yoga in the Philippines is helpful. Sahaja Yoga started in Manila in July 1995 when the first public program was held. Since then there has been some growth, especially among the Filipinos of Chinese origin. The centre is organized in the Chinese YMCA in Chinatown every Sunday and attracts a group of about 15 seekers. Of these, about six can be said to be on their way to being well-established. The other centre meets on Tuesdays in the evening at Rajiv and Vineeta’s home. They shifted to Manila from Delhi in January 1995.

One of this group of Sahaja Yogis is Dr. Marian Sy, who is a medical practitioner. He responded positively to the suggestion to organize a medical conference in the region around the same time as the International Epilepsy Conference in Beijing. At the Manila medical conference on April 19th, Dr. U.C. Rai from India and Dr. Ramesh Manocha from Australia were the two doctors participating on behalf of the Sahaja Yoga Society. Four other Sahaja Yogis and Yoginis also came from Australia and Hong Kong. About ten local doctors, some of them practising alternate forms of medicine, such as acupuncture, participated, along with 20 other seekers. The conference, though a modest effort, has created a sense of confidence in the newcomers and they are now willing to talk more openly about Sahaja Yoga to their colleagues and family.

The next day, April 20, a public program was organized in Makati, the busiest commercial district of Manila. We publicized the program in one of the major newspapers and through e-mail and personal letters. The program was organized at the JACA auditorium. About 100 people turned out for the program which was addressed by Dr. U.C. Rai, Dr. Ramesh Manocha, and Herbert Reininger who had come from Hong Kong where he is currently based. The follow-up was excellent by Manila standards, as more than 20 people came to learn more and start meditation.

The third program was organized for the Chinese community in the Downtown YMCA on Sunday, April 21. It had been advertised in all four Chinese language newspapers. It was well-attended and the hall was completely full. We are still receiving new people from that program, but again, the real benefit has been to establish some of the existing yogis and yoginis into Sahaja.

It is as difficult or easy to start Sahaja Yoga in the Philippines as in any other country, although maybe a little more difficult due to the heavy influence of the Catholic Church, on the one hand, and of all kinds of false gurus, some local and others imported from all parts of the world. The Chinese are into Tibetan Buddhism, chongkee and tai chi, and faith healing. They and the other Filipinos are strong seekers as they continue seek for the “real path.” Many come to our program but for some reason the drop out rate continues to be high. Some of the ones who have been coming longer are now beginning to accept and recognize Shri Mataji. This is a real advance after the recent programs. But it is difficult for most of them to understand the relevance and importance of the different deities and mantras. We are confident that with Shri Mataji’s blessings and the collective attention of all the Sahaja collectivity, it will work out.

— Rajiv Kumar, Manila

Beijing, China
The “International Conference on Epilepsy,” organized by the World Health Organization (WHO) was held in Beijing from April 23-26. Professor Rai presented his research papers which were very well-received. Other doctors from the UK, Australia, Russia and France also participated. In another session, Dr. Boghdan gave and introduction to Sahaja Yoga and realization to a group of doctors. Much networking was done throughout the conference by all of the members of the Sahaja delegation, including more than 20 yogis from around the world who also attended this important event.

As a result, the Chinese Ministers of Cultural Affairs and Health and Sports, among many others, got their self-realization. Both traditional Chinese and modern “Western” medicine were discussed, as well as the cultural similarities of China and India, and the importance of working together to forge good relations between the two countries. They are very eager to start a medical research centre in Beijing to teach and research Sahaja Yoga. If this pilot program is successful, similar centres could be established all over China. The Ministry officials would like to invite Shri Mataji to attend the inauguration of the research centre in August this year.

They have asked us whether it would be possible to send some Sahaja Yoga “teachers” for one year to Beijing to train their scientific staff, all costs paid by the Chinese government. Many other things happened, and we are currently working on a more detailed report on all these historic happenings.

Shri Mataji was informed and was very pleased with the events. She said that She will come in August to visit China, especially as the Chinese are going to issue an official government invitation for Her to come and speak about this great, new method of Sahaja Yoga.

— Herbert Reininger, Hong Kong

Tokyo, Japan
A medical conference took place in Tokyo on May 6th in the Indian Embassy. About 50 people attended, including some of the staff of the Embassy. There were about six or seven doctors in attendance. The audience listened very carefully to Professor Rai and Dr. Manocha. We were all surprised by the quality of the attention of the audience.

The follow-up took place two days later, and seven persons got their realization. Some could not attend this first follow up program but told us that they would join the second one. We have established very good relations with the Indian Embassy and the Japanese national newspapers on the occasion of this conference. It was a very good opportunity for us to spread Sahaja Yoga (there are less than ten Sahaja Yogis today in Japan), and to prepare for Shri Mataji’s visit next year.

— Philippe Carton, Japan

Announcements
TEV: Theatre of Eternal Values Company

CALLING ALL ACTORS, DANCERS, SET-DESIGNERS, DIRECTORS, SCRIPTWRITERS, COSTUME-MAKERS AND MAKE-UP ARTISTS IN SAHAJA YOGA

Under Shri Mataji’s advice, an international touring theatre company has been founded by Sahaja Yogis in Gent, Belgium with the following aims:

to encourage, through its work, a rebirth of modern theatre, by taking it beyond its present doomsday pessimism and fascination with evil and degradation
to reawaken a joyful awareness of Man’s true nature by producing the work of writers which celebrate the beauty and divine potential in all human beings
to encourage attitudes and ways of living which reflect the oneness of the human family
Current Activities

Application for EU and government funds
Finding sponsors from corporate and private sectors
May 12–19, 1996: Seminar in Gent for Yogis wishing to be involved
Aug.–Sept., 1996: Rehearsals for Doctor in Spite of Himself by Moliere
Oct.–Nov., 1996: European Tour
Dec.–Feb., 1997: International tour of India, Middle and Far East, and USA
Please spread this message in your collective and let us know in advance of anybody’s intention to attend the seminar in May. If you would like to be involved but are unable to come, please send us details about your background, experience and future availability.

De Rode Pomp
La Perseveranza
Tussent Pas 3
9000 Gent
Belgium
or e-mail [contact-redacted]
— Victor Vertunni, André Posman, Carlo Ferante

Russian Music Ensemble
This is a letter from your brothers and sisters from St. Petersburg, Russia. We are an ensemble of five professional vocalists and all of the members of our ensemble are Sahaja Yogis. We have experience giving concert-lectures in schools. The primary but subtle aim of these concerts is to give realization to the audience through the vibrations of the music.

During concerts we sing many songs and play a lot of music and, by example, we try to show that any pure music is composed from the heart, from the Spirit, that is God. Any song sung by a five-year-old child to his mother is spiritual in its nature. Any pure music is music to God. We sing romances by Russian composers and Russian folk and spiritual music (with the best vibrations). We also sing music by western composers (Mozart, chorales by Bach, etc.). We sing as soloists and as an ensemble, and the level of the members is quite high. For instance, we have a soprano who sings in the Kirov Opera Theatre. Our collective is a member of Petrovskaya Academy of Science and Arts (Shri Mataji also is a member of this Academy).

The idea is to give our concert lectures in your schools in order to bring the pure knowledge and vibrations of our Holy Mother to the people. However, we don’t say a word about Sahaja Yoga or Shri Mataji. Instead, we try to do our best to open the hearts of people and to awaken them to everything that is spiritual through music. If you are able to organize our concerts with the help of Sahaja Yoga or any state or national organization, we would be happy to bring our art to your country, to exchange vibrations and to spread Sahaja Yoga all over the world.

— Alexander Dmitriev, Russia

French Collecting Medical Reports
Hello to all the yogis and yoginis, brothers and sisters of the whole world.

We would like to collect the largest amount of documentation about all scientific experiments carried out, formerly, or at present, in and about Sahaja Yoga, in many different fields. For example:

The use of vibrated water under very specific circumstances in fields such as health and agriculture
The use of Shri Mataji’s photograph in various problematic areas, including health, agriculture, and the de-pollution of radioactive contaminated lands, etc.
In short, we welcome any report of experiments sustained by a truly scientific methodology. You may also send us written reports of presently conducted experiments.

Such widely collected information might, as a first step, and with your agreement be published in the magazine of Sahaja Yoga France called Nirmalight and in The Divine Cool Breeze. Later on, it might be made available to daily newspapers, weekly magazines, and even to radio and television.

The publication of a book might be contemplated, provided that it is justified by the volume and the quality of the collected information. We rely on your desire to share and make known the knowledge Shri Mataji has given us. Please do not hesitate to send us such documents through the Internet under the following references: E-mail [contact-redacted]

Or communicate by mail to: Guy Laborde, 76 bis avenue du Centennaire 94210 La Varenne St. Hilaire, France – Telephone: (33) 1.49.76.91.97

Book in Praise of Shri Ganesha
Dear brothers and sisters,

We are hoping to put together a book which will be offered to Shri Mataji at this year’s Shri Ganesha Puja. This book will be in praise of Shri Ganesha and will include:

drawings, paintings, or any visual image of Shri Ganesha (especially by children)
photos of Shri Ganesha swayambhus
poems, stories, and quotations relating to Shri Ganesha or innocence
miracle photos
It would be wonderful if all countries were represented in this book. Please contribute! Please send your contributions by August 15, 1996 or sooner to:
Shri Ganesha Project
c/o Victoria Zbylut
La Bardesque
Les Valayans
84210 Pernes-Les-Fontaines
France

Shri Mataji’s Itinerary
Subject to Change

May

3–5 — Sahasrara Puja, Cabella Ligure
Hosted by Austria, Germany, Israel, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Slovenia
June

21–23 — Kundalini Puja, Cabella Ligure
Hosted by Belgium, Spain, Holland, and Scandinavian countries
July

28–30 — Guru Puja, Cabella Ligure
Hosted by Italy, Turkey, Bulgaria, India, Nepal
August

30–31 — Krishna Puja, Cabella Ligure
Weddings in Russia
Sept. 1 — Hosted by North and South America
September

27–29 — Ganesha Puja, Cabella Ligure
Hosted by the Far East, Australia, New Zealand, and Iran
October

18–20 — Navaratri Puja, Cabella Ligure
Hosted by Switzerland, UK, Poland, Russia, and Ukraine
November

8–10 — Diwali Puja, Portugal
France, Portugal, Romania, Greece, and Africa
December

3 — India Tour begins in Delhi
4 — Puja in Delhi
Copyright © 2026 Nirmala Vidya Amruta. All Rights Reserved. Privacy | Terms of Use | Amruta is supported by the WordPress Multilingual Plugin. | oska.dev