SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 1998-05-05
TALK: Nirmala Vidya Amruta
LOCATION/EVENT: in-milan
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:23:28
CHARS: 74395
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
Post navigation
Previous post:
The Divine Cool Breeze, June-July 1998, Vol. 12, Nos. 5 and 6
Next post:
The Divine Cool Breeze, Oct-Nov 1998, Vol. 12, Nos. 9 and 10
The Divine Cool Breeze, Aug-Sept 1998, Vol. 12, Nos. 7 and 8
Books online | All Books
Saturday, August 1st, 1998
DCB
Magazine
Online, PDF
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English
Google Drive
The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume 12, Nos. 7 and 8
August and September 1998
International Newsletter

“I think now a new century is starting and so many things have to happen, and all of you must decide that you’ll do this or that. Whatever is your understanding about spreading Sahaja Yoga, you should try to, all of you, should put your mind to it.”

— Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Sahasrara Puja, Cabella, May 5, 1998

The Divine Cool Breeze
Adi Shakti Puja Talk Synopsis
Adi Shakti Puja Seminar
Guru Puja Talk Synopsis
Guru Puja 1998
News from Around the World
News from South Africa
News from Aruba, West Indies
Creative Expressions
New CD—Children of the Light
New CD—Point of Balance
Theatre of Eternal Values Update
Dr. U.C. Rai Tours Europe
Some Questions and Answers: Professor Rai with Sahaja Yogis
India Tour 1998
Adi Shakti Puja Talk Synopsis
Cabella, Italy, June 21, 1998

The Russian people are very open-minded, especially the scientists. They were suppressed, so they tried to find out about the subtler things. They found out about chemicals and the physical properties of light, which took them to the subtle knowledge of auras around the human body. Their research in this area was accepted all over the world.

There is one physicist who holds a very high position and is very well-known throughout the world. “Very humble and very nice person, and when he came out with this discovery, I was happy in a way, because scientifically if it is proved, then nobody can challenge it.” He has written a book describing in algebraic terms the vacuum that exists beyond consciousness. Only in that vacuum can you know reality.

“He showed so many of My photographs, especially the ones where a lot of energy is coming out of My Sahasrara when we were on a boat. So he said, ‘She is the source of all the cosmic energy,’ and that’s what Adi Shakti is. She’s the one who creates everything.” Her first manifestation is on the left hand side as Mahakali, and that is where She created Shri Ganesha. “His purity, innocence, and auspiciousness had to be created before She created the universe.”

Then She goes up in the body of the Virata on the right hand side and there She creates all the universes. There are 14 bhuvanas (many universes make one bhuvana). Then She creates all the chakras, the Adi chakras or the pitas, and then She settles the Kundalini.

Kundalini is only part of Adi Shakti. “The rest of the work is much more than this…. First She creates these chakras in the head, we call them the pitas of the chakras. And then She comes down and creates these chakras, which are in the body of the Virata.”

After this, She creates human beings through the evolutionary process. “So when She creates water, and She creates all the universes, She chooses this Mother Earth as the best place to play Her evolutionary process, and there She makes this little microscopic thing…. When My book will be released, you can see how first hydrogen, carbon and oxygen and all of these things were mixed up, how nitrogen comes into play and how a living process starts.”

“With this happening… whatever I write, now people won’t doubt. They will know it is a scientific fact and that whatever I say is a fact.” Believing in a Mother, in Adi Shakti, was impossible for many Christians and Muslims, whose religions completely negated the mother. Only Indian philosophy had the Mother, and Indians are Shakti worshippers.

“In India people are very sure that it’s the Mother who does everything.” That is why Maharashtra has the swayambhus of the Mother: Mahakali, Mahasaraswati, Mahalakshmi and Saptashringi in Nasik, which represents Adi Shakti. “Adi Shakti is the fourth dimension of this power which gives you the ascent, and ultimately through Mahalakshmi channel only, you get your realization.”

The Mother Earth, the whole atmosphere, all the elements are one with the Adi Shakti. “She could create all that without any difficulties. But when human beings came, they got their freedom. That’s the only species which fell into the maya of thinking, and of having the ego in them. With this ego, a maya worked on them, and they forgot about the principle that created this universe; they took it for granted.” They started feeling that the earth is their right, that they are the owners of everything, and this led to aggression and destruction. They never even thought that what they were doing was wrong. They were very cruel, and had no feelings for other people.

Now Sahaja Yoga has started, and the Sahaja Yogis receive the blessings of Adi Shakti directly. “But still, I must say, amongst Sahaja Yogis also, we don’t have people whom I would call as very well matured.” For some it’s a fashion, or they may have some selfish reason for being in Sahaja Yoga. “If you are in Sahaja Yoga, you must know now you are responsible for the whole world. You are the only people who have come forward, you are the only people who have achieved something and then, at this juncture, you should behave in a manner that behooves a big saint or a realized soul.”

But some yogis have no respect for themselves or others. Some are money-oriented; others who are power-oriented are more dangerous because they are insulting and dominating, and give a bad name to Sahaja Yoga. For some time they look alright, but after a while, you’ll find they’ll disappear from the field of Sahaja Yoga. “It’s a very big cleansing process going on.”

“You must understand that you have come in the field of very high consciousness where you are in contact with the Divine. Now here if you behave like ordinary people who have no divinity within them, how long will you continue like this? So this is very important that you should try to meditate and evolve yourselves and become really very good Sahaja Yogis.”

In some places we are very lucky, but in some countries, the people are just deaf and dumb. They can’t understand Sahaja Yoga. “For My program they do come, and afterwards they just disappear…. Sahaja Yogis are responsible for this. The way they go about, the way they want to do Sahaj work, is not Sahaj. Must be something definitely wrong with the whole thing and that’s why it’s not working out the same way as it is working out in many places.”

The further work has to be done through you people because you are the channels who have to transform people. How many people have we given realization to? What have we done for Sahaja Yoga?

People who go to false gurus will go on talking with great pride about someone who has given them nothing. But Sahaja Yogis are very shy. “They don’t want to talk about Sahaja Yoga openly to others, which is a very wrong thing you are doing, because you are responsible for this. You have been given realization… you must try to give realization to others.”

So far, men have been more dynamic in working it out. “The women in Sahaja Yoga are not yet coming up to that level as they should. They have to be more sensible about it, and they have to work it out.” They can do it, but they put their attention on, worry and complain about, very minor things.

Women should be much more dynamic than men “because they are the Shakti, and I am a woman…. They can transform so many people, they can do so much good to others, they can bring so much love and compassion, because this love and compassion is a quality of a mother, of a woman and if the women don’t have that quality, it is useless to be a woman.”

“You have a short time now, you got your realization and you must decide what have you done so far, what have you achieved so far. All sorts of funny ideas will come up. They’ll take up rituals, then they’ll talk about it. This is a form of power orientation. They want to oppress others, and behave as though they are very good. They will start saying, ‘Mataji said so, this is Mataji’s idea.’ … But ask them, ‘How many have you given realization?’ … Talking about others, criticizing others, talking about the defects of Sahaja Yoga… is still a very preliminary thing that has happened before, and it should stop now.”

“Once this book is out, all over the world it will be known about our work, we’ll not be challenged any more. But still we have to see for ourselves, that if we have achieved this kind of a recognition, then… our capabilities should be up to that. We should not be lagging behind.”

Many yogis, especially the yoginis, don’t know much about Sahaja Yoga. They don’t know about the chakras or about the deities. “How can they be Sahaja Yogis? … It’s not outside that you are a Sahaja Yogi but it is inside. Inside you have to have that kind of an understanding of the chakras and of Sahaja Yoga, how it works, how it helps you.”

“Now supposing, if I’m the source of that energy, which you know very well I am, then you achieve—you also—a kind of a perfection about dealing with people and bringing them to Sahaja Yoga. It is a very important work you have to do, is to bring Sahaja Yogis in Sahaja Yoga. What I find that some people are very much still lagging behind and it is very surprising that they live in that country, they are part and parcel of that country and they are not bothered. Under these circumstances they’ll be blamed, that why didn’t you… find out the ways and methods of convincing at least your countrymen?”

“So Sahaja Yoga, at the brink of growth, cannot grow only with one country, two countries; all the countries have to be brought into Sahaja Yoga…. But what I find about Sahaja Yogis, that once they start spreading Sahaja Yoga also, their ego comes up and they think they are great Sahaja Yogis, they are great leaders, all these kind of stupid ideas walk into their heads…. You have to just think in a very humble manner.”

“Humility is sometimes very difficult because the culture of the West is not a humble culture, it is a culture of aggression, a culture of domination.” But what have they achieved? They take drugs and do all kinds of sinful things.

“I am going to start some sort of organizations that will do good to human beings.” You can do this as well. “But first you have to get rid of your ego.” When you are humble, your attention becomes steady. “This ego is very simple for you because you worship Christ, and Christ is the one who was settled on the Agnya chakra.” But somehow the humility and peacefulness of Christ is not there—just the opposite. Artificially they are showing off that they are philanthropists, but inside in their heart there is no love or compassion in the real sense of the word.

“When we are dealing with reality, we have to know that we cannot just go on with things which are artificial, which are befooling others, but we have to really become that…. Then only you have done the job for which you are born at this juncture of blossom times. Otherwise you could have been born earlier and could have been something different, but you are specially born, so you realize your value, realize yourself what you are and try to understand, to have self-respect and try to do things which are very important as Sahaja Yogis.”

“Of course you are doing a job, you are doing other things, but you’ll be amazed if you do work of Sahaja Yoga you’ll find more time for everything. Once you start doing God’s work, God does your work and that’s how you will be amazed how you get so much time to do the right thing. Now it is for you to go back and introspect, see for yourself.”

“Now the Adi Shakti Herself has come, but… I’m very simple to look at. In My behaviour I’m very, very humble and people take Me for granted. I don’t do anything, I don’t want to punish you… but you yourself get punished, you yourself become useless if you do not look after yourself and grow yourself.”

This Russian scientist is so learned, yet so humble. “He told me that, ‘Just imagine I’m sitting before the Creator of this world and still I’m very normal.’ I said, ‘It’s good that you don’t feel My presence so oppressive…. I’m very happy.’ ‘No,’ he said, ‘I just feel love, just feel the compassion.'”

“We should have just love and compassion… in a way that we should not harm anybody’s heart. To hurt someone is very sinful but some people enjoy that very much, they think they are very clever. It’s not so. When you talk to someone, you must say something which is very soothing and good.”

Another problem is that at the slightest thing, people get into a temper. You have to tell your temper, ‘Keep quiet. I have nothing to do with you.’ Some people are very subtly power-oriented, and use tricks to control others. What do you gain out of this? “In these worldly things, you might be a little bit popular, a little bit having a position or something, but… that is not going to help you. What is going to help you the most is to make yourself a perfect channel for Sahaja Yoga.”

People in the west must develop humility. In Russia, people are so humble, so dedicated and so full of love. “They don’t even raise their eyes to Me…. In the west, Russia is a country which will achieve a very great height in spirituality and that means they will be the most powerful people.”

“Let us see what you are doing in your own country and how you are going to work it out. You see there are so many things you can do, very easily, if you see for yourself that you are the instrument of the Divine. And then your temperament will change, the nature will change. You’ll become a very, very sweet person, a likeable person, and everybody will think that this is a saint walking around.”

“Whatever is the discovery, is not a discovery for Me, but discovery for the whole world, and I’m sure once it is established and is exposed to the whole world, things will change for you, and for Me also. May God bless you.”

Adi Shakti Puja Seminar
By the grace of Shri Mataji, the Sahaja Yogis could worship Her in Her form of Shri Adi Shakti on the weekend of June 19–21 in Cabella. This puja was organized by the Dutch, Belgian, Spanish, and Scandinavian yogis. They had a difficult task because the hangar had to be brought down from Cabella near the Castle to a very nice place called Albera near the river, about 3 km outside the village. On Thursday morning there was no hangar in sight, but by Saturday all the Sahaja Yogis could enjoy a nice evening program with Shri Mataji.

Two miracle photos were taken: one of the hangar site before the hangar was set up, and one after the hangar was in place.

In the new place, there is enough parking for all the cars and shady places to rest or eat. The river is 100 m away and the yogis spent most of the time foot soaking or even body soaking. It is also outside of the village so one is not so much tempted to have cappuccino or ice cream. We spent a whole weekend just with Sahaja Yogis.

The hangar was finished quite late on Saturday evening and so the program with Shri Mataji started around 11:30 p.m. First we heard a sitar player followed by his wife, a famous sarod player. She had also performed at the Birthday celebrations this year. This lasted until about 3 a.m. Shri Mataji urged all of the yogis to develop an appreciation for this wonderful music. She commented that in these modern times, Indian people have lost interest in their own musical heritage, and that only through Sahaja Yoga would this great music continue on.

Then the program of the organizing countries started. They cut all the solo performances, but it still lasted until 4:30 a.m. Shri Mataji praised the Spanish for their unique and intricate use of rhythm. There were many bhajans and also a very nice Bharata Natyam dance from the Belgian Sahaja Yogis. All the ladies are taking dance lessons now and they had created a collective dance to the music of Sahaj bhajans. Shri Mataji also commented that to entertain each other is a quality of the Divine. When we finally went to bed the roosters were already waking the hens!

Since this was the first puja in the new location, there were some moments of tremendous chaos. At times during the weekend, life seemed like an enormous boardgame with each move somehow miraculously working out at the last moment to smoothly lead to the next event.

The puja was announced for 7 p.m. and Shri Mataji arrived a little after 9 p.m. Uncle Guido started by describing the events from the tour of Russia. Shri Mataji had asked him to speak about it. In Russia there is a very famous physicist who can scientifically prove that Shri Mataji is the source of all vibrations and ultimately, of everything. Shri Mataji continued to tell about this Russian scientist in Her talk, and mentioned for the first time that She is writing another book which will be ready sometime soon.

The puja felt serene but powerful. One very memorable gift was a giant windmill festively painted and decorated by the Dutch yogis. Shri Mataji left at approximately 1 a.m. Because of the late hour, those travelling in the night packed and left rather quickly. The yogis who had the opportunity to sleep in the hangar were blessed with a blissful atmosphere filled with vibrations that gently lulled us to sleep. The peaceful atmosphere of the puja stayed with us through the night and into the next morning. As we rose, gathering our belongings, we could still feel that wonderful feeling of security wrapping around us with the confidence that even the smallest details of our lives were being effortlessly managed. How wonderful to feel the peace and joy of walking in the Shadow of the Devi!

— Lakshmi Ward, Germany and Nancy Kumar, USA

Guru Puja Talk Synopsis
Cabella Ligure, Italy, July 12, 1998

“Today we have assembled here to do the Guru Puja. The word guru comes from the one which is magnetic… the one which attracts the attention of the seekers.” It also means a person who is very steady, very deep, who has the knowledge, and who can act like the mother earth. In Sanskrit, Gurutwakareshwari means the attraction of the heaviness of the mother earth.

“It is a power of the mother earth that makes us stand properly on our legs when it is rotating with such a tremendous speed…. This gravity has to be in a Guru.”

“Gravity means a kind of a serious understanding of oneself and one’s own responsibilities. So a Guru has to be very steady. In these modern times, people are very mobile, all the time agitated, all the time getting disturbed…. These disturbing qualities come from our deficiency in our gravity. A person who has gravity doesn’t get depressed, neither gets excited, nor gets overly enthusiastic, nor is he very sad or unhappy…. He’s in the centre of his being.”

How do we become the Guru? Many Sahaja Yogis have felt that they are gurus. “They have tried to behave in a funny manner and have lost their guru position. They must have introspection, they must watch themselves.”

“If a person runs about changing because a fashion has come, because people have suppressed them, or… just to please people of cheap values… then he cannot be a guru. He has to station himself properly on the values of Sahaja Yoga. Without introspection you will not know. You will never remember what you have done wrong, nor will you think of what you have to do right. But that is only possible if you go on improving yourself.”

All the great saints praised their gurus. Gyaneshwara called the guru a preceptor. “He says you are not to challenge the guru; otherwise you can never become a guru. For namesake you might be, but you are not.” Secondly, you can never misbehave, be rude, arrogant or show your temper to a guru. If that is so, you are still a very low-level personality. Also, if you speak against other gurus who are real gurus, then you are not a guru. But you all have now got vibratory awareness so you are capable of finding out about everyone. “Now you need not talk about your own understanding of a person, but try to face that person directly and tell that person, ‘this is the problem,’ and ask him to change.”

In Sahaja Yoga we have something more than other gurus had. In the old days, the disciples were literally frightened of the gurus, and the gurus did not necessarily help out their disciples. “One guru said, ‘You go on forgiving them and the more you forgive, the worse they become. And they will show no ascent at all, so you have to be very strict with them…. If you give them everything so easily, they will never value… their self-realization.’ “I said, ‘It’s not so, you have to give them a chance. You have to allow them to rise, and to allow them to become something.'”

There are many very strict gurus who require complete humility, obedience, and surrender. “Now I have met people who are like that sometimes, then I stopped talking to them, that’s all. If they want to improve, they’ll improve, if they don’t want to improve you cannot force them to improve. But according to these gurus, there should be a great fear in their mind, that they should be so frightened that they should behave themselves.”

“Now we expect so much from the guru—that he’s your father, mother, he’s a friend, everything. He is a pure person who just wants your ascent, he wants to look after you, he wants to guide you, wants to protect you, and take you to the life of spirituality.” The disciple has to be a pure person with a pure desire to become a spiritual person. “If he doesn’t have this pure desire, has some other desires, then absolutely useless.”

Many come to Sahaja Yoga wanting to have a big name, become a great master, dominate everything. Others try to make money. Some try to play politics, saying things here and there. “All these things are not going to give you any ascent whatsoever. You have come here only to achieve a great life of spirituality of becoming a guru.”

“This politics business is quite a lot. People try to enjoy the position of a leader, so they try to keep that position in a very special way. There’s no need. If you are a leader because you are a great master, you will remain. Nobody can challenge you. Nobody can dethrone you and one should not get disturbed with any such fear. Sahaja Yoga is a yoga in which fear doesn’t play any part.”

“Only thing for your ascent, it is necessary that you introspect. Try to find out what have you been doing. Are you an absolutely humble person? Do you do whatever is told to you? Supposing I tell somebody just go to someplace, he may not go. He’ll come and tell Me… some excuse…. If you are not obedient, then you cannot become a guru because if you cannot obey, how can others obey you? This obedience is not for any personal gain of the guru—not at all. But for your gain only, for your education, for your ascent.”

If such a view is taken, you will start getting all the qualities of a guru. First of all, a guru cannot be a fussy person: I want this house, I want that thing, I don’t like this. “How can he ascend? These are funny habits which make you miserable…. No habit should cling to a guru.”

A guru must be beyond time and should not worry about time. If anyone has to go to the airport or to some function, they start to feel they are getting late and become upset. If you worry, you don’t go beyond time. “When you go beyond time, you control time. Time is with you all the time. Whenever you go, it happens.”

To worry about time is a headache. “If you leave it to this divine power and believe in it, then everything works out for your good. And if it does not, you must know that it is your destiny, you must accept…. Because whatever you have fixed up yourself as something very great, is not. So what is the greatest thing you have to achieve? Your detachment.”

A guru becomes Gunateet, beyond the three gunas. “Either you are a right-sided person or a left-sided person. These two gunas within us are of no importance. Supposing you are a right-sided person, then… you become over-active. Over-activity gives you fatigue and all kinds of diseases. Such a person, called a rajo guni, is extremely speedy and creates problems for himself and his family.”

The left-sided person, called tamo guni, is afraid of darkness, afraid of everything. “He always tries to trouble people in a very crooked manner, not openly…. Rajo guni has an opinion of his own about everything,… He goes on forcing it onto other persons, but if you see his own life, he is in complete misery. He cannot carry on with people, he cannot talk to people and there’s a very big gap between himself, his spirit and his being.”

The left-sided tamo gunis end up with all kinds of psychosomatic diseases. “Psychosomatic diseases are very dangerous, and not curable by human doctors, so you have to take to Sahaja Yoga. But again you go to the right or to the left. This is not a very good attitude towards life—that you get bound by one of these gunas, or you are all the time like a pendulum moving from right to left, left to right.”

“So you have to be a steady person; for that you all have to meditate. I know immediately a person who meditates, and I know who does not meditate. You will yourself know a person who meditates. It’s a question of ten, fifteen minutes, but that you must do every night and morning, about five minutes meditation. Then you develop your balance, you develop your tenacity. You develop your own body in such a manner that it can stand lots of nonsense. It can bear lots of things.”

“You don’t have then desires left—what food you should eat, when you should eat, whom you should please—nothing of the kind. You yourself become such a sweet person that everybody is pleased, and understands that one has to be like you…. You become like a model. People start following you—that means you become a guru. In this way, you get rid of these two habits that you have of left and right side.”

“Now sattwa gunis are the people who believe in the righteousness. But when they are righteous, they have contempt for others who are not righteous.” They can become aloof, go to the Himalayas, sit there and not meet anybody, get out of society, and just establish yourself as a big guru somewhere. The older generation of gurus doesn’t want to face human beings, saying they are good for nothing and only trouble you. “So I said, ‘Why have you become a guru? If you cannot manage them, if you cannot get out of the troubles they are giving you… and remain in your peace, then what’s the use of becoming this?'”

“They have lots of powers… but they said, ‘Easier to control even a snake than to control a human being. Today they might behave in a particular manner, suddenly they will become horrible.’… I said, ‘There is a way of putting them right. You first give them realization. In the light of their spirit they can see how they are doing wrong things.'”

“Ninety-nine per cent people will know what’s going wrong with them, where they are missing the point…. Spirit is like a mirror, where you see yourself, clearly, and you start changing yourself. There’s no introspection actually needed then, when you have your spirit awakened. You can watch yourself. You can see for yourself, clearly, as soon as you become a developed or evolved Sahaja Yogi.”

“And that is one point one should see, if it has happened to you, if you can see something wrong with you. If you can find out what sort of defects you have. If you can detach yourself from those defects, and if you can understand that all these attachments and defects and habits are pulling you down, then only you can leave them.”

“But that only happens when you have this mirror of your self shining through. When this light comes to you, you see for yourself what is wrong with you, what is the wrong path you are taking. Overnight you have seen people have given up so many things. Many gross things they give up, but still there are many subtle things which stick on to them.”

“First thing that happens to you is that you start finding out what’s wrong with your own people of your own nation.” You get detached when you start seeing without being identified. Then you become a free person. Family attachment is very dangerous. Many Sahaja Yogis have been lost through this attachment. “We don’t say that you detach yourself from your family or get out of it, but in a subtle way you should understand what are they up to and what they are doing.”

This subtle understanding doesn’t give you any right to criticize them, though. “You should see for yourself what’s wrong with you. You know all these subtleties you criticize, that such a person is such, such a person is such, but you also have the same problems with you.”

Spiritual life is more important to a person than anything else on this earth because such a person has been seeking the truth, seeking reality. “Once you know the reality, you don’t want to cling onto something which is not reality. You want to be a person who is above all these things, that you can see all these things. And that is how you can save others who are getting drowned into the ocean of darkness, into the ocean of misidentification, only when you are above this.”

“The countries where Sahaja Yoga has spread… there have been people who were not identified with those countries, and think that they have to help all these countrymen to come up, to join them. For that, tremendous patience and love is necessary. As you know this cosmic power, as they call it, which they say I’m the source. Actually, it is the power of love, of divine love, of pure love. And such a love doesn’t demand anything, doesn’t want anything. But it acts, it works.”

“If you love somebody, you would not like to do something to displease that person…. Without that development within you, you cannot become collective. In collectivity, what happens that you feel for others, you understand others. You may not show off, but you do inside yourself, you know.”

“Supposing somebody has done lots of funny things with you, doesn’t matter. But gradually you will see he will change, gradually he will become better. Because he’ll realize that whatever he has been doing has not been a correct thing to do. He will not only feel guilty, that’s not the way, but he will say, ‘I should correct, why did I do like this? I should not have done.’ Gradually he will improve, but for that you should have a great sense of forgiveness, great sense of understanding.”

“People also misbehave because they’ve had no training how to be alright, how to be humble… because in their culture perhaps, there is nothing but just anger, and arrogance is regarded as something great…. Such people are to be forgiven again and again and see that they change.”

“I have a faith that all human beings can be made into beautiful flowers of fragrance. But I know there are some difficult ones…. If they don’t have the pure desire, you cannot force it on them. So forget it, they are difficult people, forget about them. But those who want, those who have a great desire which is absolutely pure desire, not for money, not for position, not for anything else, but for achieving a great state of spirituality, such people are to be helped at any cost.”

“I know some of them have gone to very wrong gurus and they have suffered, they have a bad agnya, they have all kinds of things. Doesn’t matter, you should try to help them. If they can listen to you, if they can understand what you are telling them, I’m sure it will work out.” In many countries it has worked out so well, and they have become Sahaja Yogis of such a great value and level. We never had so many saints in the olden days…. There were not so many to help each other and to protect each other.”

“So collectivity is to be learned very well… because later on when you become the guru, when you have to guide the people, you will know what are the problems of the collectivity are. Also you will know how to overcome that, how to make collectivity perfect. And once you learn that thing, you’ll be amazed that you have mastered the art of being a guru.”

“I would like to see so many of you becoming a real guru, real masters. Not only in your jobs, in your talents, but in your own life, people should say that such and such person is a real guru. For that, as I said, you must learn obedience, complete obedience. You should not question the guru. Whatever is told to you, you must do—though in Sahaja Yoga I do not say that. Today’s the first time I am saying it. Because I find so many of you fall a little short of becoming perfect.”

You don’t have to sacrifice or give up anything. You don’t have to give up your families, and do odd things just to show that you are perfect. It’s a state within yourself which you have to establish, “where you become extremely humble, obedient. And you’ll be glowing with this light, I’m sure.”

“Once you understand the importance, then you will dedicate yourself to become a personality of a real quality. It’s very difficult, as people sometimes say, but I think the easiest thing to be, because that’s the most comfortable way of living in life. No use fighting, no use quarrelling, nobody trying to show off and all that. The care of everyone, the suggestion of care, is very much satisfying for others. A little care here and there, people like it.”

“And that only comes from a very noble soul, who bothers about small, small things, about whatever others need. It’s not for your own advancement. It’s not for your own sort of leadership… or for your own positions…. But it’s for your own ascent, for your higher life, that you give up all these ideas of leadership.”

“It’s absurd the way sometimes I find some Sahaja Yogis are so anxious to assert themselves as leaders. It’s not correct. So many times I’ve explained to you that your own development, your own correction, your own position in Sahaja Yoga will say what you are. Whatever others may say, doesn’t matter. What you say about yourself, truly, truthfully, is the reality, and you must face yourself all the time.”

“I would say, especially for the ladies, that I’m a woman and I have worked very hard all these years. And as a woman I must tell, that all the ladies should try. Because they always say we are shaktis, but in their life I don’t see there’s any work done as shaktis. Only they are sort of dependent all the time on Sahaja Yoga. They have to stand up in their own freedom. They have to be independent and they should have right ideas about everything. I’m sure if the ladies come up that way, Sahaja Yoga will spread very much.”

“Men are working much more for Sahaja Yoga than women are. I can understand because they have families, they have children. But the most important thing is, that once you take to active Sahaja Yoga, then your children also come up well, the family is also looked after. After all, there is this divine power which looks after all of you. You must believe that this divine power thinks, understands, it organizes, above all, it loves you. This divine power has to be understood that it is now your own and that you are in the realm of this divine power, where you won’t have any problems whatsoever. If you leave things to the divine power, it will all work out.”

“It’s something to be understood very well, that the power within you, what you have, understands and understands you also. It is a way of power which is your own power, but you cannot control it. It knows about you. Whenever you are falling, whenever you are doing wrong, the same power which protects you and loves you like a mother, will correct you and bring you to the right path.”

“I think now a new century is starting and so many things have to happen, and all of you must decide that you’ll do this or that. Whatever is your understanding is about spreading Sahaja Yoga, you should try to, all of you, should put your mind to it. If women can’t go out, they can write down something, they can write about their spiritual ascent or about whatever their experiences are.”

“All those who have got also very miraculous photographs, they should send it over here. Very important is because this gentleman is coming here… and he’s going to analyse all of them…. Also you write down about your different experiences you have had in Sahaja Yoga… He told Me that he would like to publish a book like that. And now the time has come for us to publish our miracles that have taken place…. So I have to request you to send, as soon as possible, written well, in English language or in Hindi language or Marathi.”

“I’m sure today’s lecture you will again go through it and understand it and work it out. May God bless you.”

Guru Puja 1998
It was quite a powerful Puja weekend. As you all know, at Guru Puja there are representatives from all the countries in the world where Sahaja Yoga has been practised. The Italians’ organization was fantastic. For Shri Adi Shakti Puja, the hangar was moved to the next village, Albera, which is a 7–8 minute drive from “downtown Cabella.”

The Italians had organized a shuttle van service between the hangar and Cabella every 30 minutes. This new place is very practical for many reasons. Firstly, it gives Shri Mataji and Her family some privacy and secondly, this place is just next to the river which made a heavenly difference for the yogis.

The host countries had invited Nirmal Sangeet Sarita (about 8 artists) and the famous sitarist, Nishad Khan, for the entertainment program. Shri Mataji did not attend the Friday night program as She had spent the whole day sorting out many other matters related to the Puja weekend. Nevertheless, we had the honour of having Sir C. P. for the Friday night program. Shri Mataji had expressed the desire earlier that morning to show a video from Russia where a Russian physicist was able to show some of his research work. He has proved by scientific theories that Shri Mataji is the source of infinite cosmic energy. It became even more impressive when Sir C.P. was able to give some more details about this, as well as talk about the Royal Albert Hall program. The Friday night program also featured Nirmal Sangeet Sarita, some new songs and qawwalis.

Shri Mataji was very busy the whole weekend with Her family who had come over from India. The Saturday night program started around 9:00 p.m. after the arrival of Shri Mataji. The concert began with a great young artist from Nagpur Music Academy who played sarod on the synthesizer. It was quite remarkable. After that, the Italians did quite an amazing program. They had Kuchipudi dance, Bharatanatyam, and a Panjabi Bhangra dance which was excellent.

Then there was a very nice drama with some TEV artists. There was also a documentary on Sicily. It was about how the respect for the Mother has been established so strongly in Italy and Sicily. The most important thing about this film was that it was directed by Shri Mataji’s grandson, Anand Varma. She was quite pleased with it.

After that, Nirmal Sangeet Sareeta came back on the stage and it was quite a profound concert. Then Shri Mataji invited Nishad Khan to come to the stage. In his own words, it was his best performance. He started with Raga Darbari and also played Raga Bahar and Jai Jai Vanti. The entertainment program ended after 4:00 a.m. After that Shri Mataji asked the yogis to go and enjoy the moonlight by the river.

On Sunday, Shri Mataji arrived at around 9:30 p.m. for the Puja. It was a very short but very powerful Puja and speech. Shri Mataji talked a lot about gravity in a guru. People should automatically be attracted toward a guru. She said that She would be very happy to see at least a few yogis who can be good gurus with all the qualities of the Guru principle. Shri Mataji said many times in Her speech that She expects every single Sahaja Yogi to become a Sahaj Guru and spread Sahaja Yoga.

Shri Mataji also asked the Yogis to write their miracle stories and send then to Cabella. She has asked for a book to be published on miracle stories.

— Manoj Kumar, USA

News from Around the World
News from South Africa
At the Grahamstown Arts Festival, South Africa, the Sahaja presentations which had been planned worked out better than we had hoped for: a large number of people received realization and a very good time was had by all the Sahaja Yogis who came. But it was the unplanned events which gave the week magic. For ten days in July the whole town is given over to this arts festival, and people come from all over the world, especially southern Africa.

By South African standards a large number of Sahaja Yogis supported our presentations at the festival. A British Sahaja Yogi kindly sponsored two ladies from Soweto, near Johannesburg, to come and help us with people who only spoke indigenous African languages; a French yogini came all the way from Europe, and about 30 other Sahaja Yogis from all over South Africa travelled the long distance to be with us. We had a stall in the high street, a room where we had a Sahaja exhibition and played bhajans leading to realization being given. We had two introductory programs with bhajans and dancing in the local township (the suburb formerly reserved for Xhosa people). We had a TV interview and a number of newspaper articles written by and about people from all the many cultures of the four rainbow nation. This was happening the same week that Shri Mataji was giving programs in London and it is perhaps no accident that the first group of British settlers in South Africa founded Grahamstown.

Most of the visiting Sahaja Yogis stayed at a farmhouse in the countryside some 30 km from the town, so the whole program turned into a collective get-together. We had a havan, and much singing and dancing. The ladies from Soweto were the stars when it came to giving realization. Wherever they went, whether at the stall, giving prearranged programs or even standing on the side of the road when the car bringing them into town one day broke down, people felt cool breezes and joy, and received realization. They were an example for all of us with their warmth, commitment and total trust in the power of Mother as the Holy Spirit.

At the first township program, which was conducted in Xhosa, after the newcomers had got their realization most of the young people who had come decided that as we had sung for them in Indian languages and English, they should sing to us in Xhosa. They treated us to a stirring rendering of our national anthem, Nkosi Sikilele Africa, which means God Bless Africa and includes a line which says, “Come Holy Spirit, please come to Africa.”

On many occasions during the festival we felt She was here, blessing us and helping to create a new South Africa which truly expresses the joyful, creative and fulfilling qualities of the left swadhishthan. Thank You, Mother. With greetings from the Sahaja Yogis of South Africa.

— Linda Williams, South Africa

News from Aruba, West Indies
Here is some wonderful news from the tiny Caribbean island of Aruba. A Sahaja Yogi couple, Nikkhil and Raani Varde, have been living there for a while, and they have been trying to spread Sahaja Yoga in their island. Last year, when Shri Mataji was visiting Los Angeles, they sent an invitation (via email) to Shri Mataji to visit their island. Their invitation was presented to Her. Since then, Nikkhil and Raani have been having a lot of success with their programs.

They had a major public program this summer in which 350 or more seekers got their self-realization. The hall was packed by 6:00 p.m. which is when the program was scheduled to start. It is very unusual for Arubans to be on time! The vibrations were very strong and almost everyone felt the cool breeze. The Colombian Sahaja Yogis who had come down to help out with the program were quite amazed at the response. Everything, every detail worked out so perfectly and spontaneously. After the program a lady from a local radio station (she had attended the programs on both days) called and said she would like us to talk about Sahaja Yoga on her talk show the following weekend. Another seeker who had come for the program offered us a larger hall for the weekly follow-ups at half the rent! Jai Shri Mataji!

— Nikkhil and Raani Varde, Aruba

Creative Expressions
New CD—Children of the Light
The long-awaited Children of the Light, Dancing in Divine Love CD/audio-tape was released at Krishna Puja this year in Cabella. This production was personally named by our Divine Mother and has beautiful vibrations. In the recording of these tracks we strongly felt that our Divine Mother was here producing and arranging the tracks.

The production was recorded in Vancouver, Canada by the Vancouver Collective. It includes very nice versions of Jago Kundlini Ma and Vishwa Vandita, as well as a Russian bhajan Issuse Hristos and a 16-minute music score set with poems written by Sahaja Yogis from around the world.

For more information or to order, contact anyone in the Vancouver Collective and/or Clayton Carrigan at E-mail: [contact-redacted]

New CD—Point of Balance
American Sahaja Yogi and jazz guitarist/composer Steven Kirby’s CD of original compositions entitled Point Of Balance is now widely available in the US and Canada through stores like Tower, HMV and Borders. It can also be special ordered from any record store, if it doesn’t happen to be in stock, by telling the salesperson the artist’s name, the name of the recording (Point of Balance), the record label (A-Records) and the catalogue number (AL 73124).

The release has been a bit delayed in most of Europe but was expected to be available there widely by the end of August, if not sooner. It is currently available in Japan, too. In Asia (including Australia) it was scheduled for release in September.

For updates on the progress of the CD, to read reviews, and get information on live appearances, anyone who’s interested can visit Steven’s web site (www.stevenkirby.com) or the record company web site (www.challenge.nl). A sample review from Jazz Times: “Point Of Balance is an entire album of beautiful, meaningful compositions that sound as refreshing and striking now as Pat Metheny’s Bright Size Life did 22 years ago. Kirby is one of the most promising new composers and players on the modern jazz scene today.”

Theatre of Eternal Values Update
It has probably been a while since many of you have heard about what Theatre of Eternal Values has been up to, so we thought we’d give you an update and share with you some of our adventures.

The Long Gap After a successful tour of schools and the general public in Austria and Germany in October and November ’97, we left for our own countries, sad to say goodbye, but in need of financial and physical recuperation!

One month passed… OK, a bit of a rest after two years of touring. Two months passed. Yes, still nice to earn some money. Three months… four months… for all of us the gap was becoming too long and there was an urgent need to come together again to spread vibrations through theatre.

Six months later, thanks to Our Mother’s blessings and the tireless work of Martin and Sita, TEV members are getting on planes, walking, swimming, roller-skating, rowing to Austria to begin another tour of The Imaginary Invalid.

Rehearsing Again We all feel extremely blessed and happy to be together again working in Shri Mataji’s theatre company, but the idea of making the play fresh and rehearsing for the millionth time weighed heavy on our minds at first. However as soon as we began working, a new dimension began to evolve. We again found fresh things and new depths to the play, and are beginning to realize that just as we are constantly evolving as realized souls, in the same way Shri Mataji’s work has an organic element. In order for vibrations to flow and for us to become better actors/instruments we have to surrender to change and enjoy working the play again and again.

The Joy of Togetherness After a week of rehearsals we headed for the streets of Vienna. During the Edinburgh Festival last summer we developed a street parade to attract attention for the play and distribute leaflets. This involves costumes, make-up, music and lots of fun—even in the rain!

On the evening of our first performance in Akzent Theatre many people came and the response we received was extremely encouraging. The joy of performing together again and experiencing the tremendous vibrations on stage was incredible for all of us. Catherine, our director, was in the audience and she told us that the faces of the public were transformed during the play—some even left dancing.

We experience a tremendous rush of vibrations during the performances and have received many letters from students thanking us for giving them such enjoyable theatre. Some have even mentioned that they felt something indescribable during the show. Jai Shri Mataji!

After this evening in Theatre Akzent we also performed for schools during the day as well as evening performances for adults. Our feelings of unity seemed to grow with each performance and our final night was magic. We felt like Shri Mataji held us in a vacuum of vibrations on the stage. We could only surrender and let Her run the show!

Being Looked After Where to start? We are staying in Feichtenbach Ashram for the second time and feel once more completely at home and relaxed. We are always looked after extremely well and can hardly begin to thank the yogis enough for all their love, support and care. We have been so much supported by Austria and realize how hard it is to look after such a big group. Despite this we are always received with open arms wherever we go.

Funding and Local Representation Throughout the run of The Imaginary Invalid TEV has been very generously supported by the collectives of those countries hosting the play when there has been a shortfall in receipts. Negotiations for longer-term funding continue, but the avenues of European and other supporting agencies are labyrinthine and it is a long process. In the meantime, the company would like to feel that there was an opportunity for Sahaja Yogis worldwide to contribute to the running expenses and costs of putting on the next production.

Ideally, TEV would like to have a representative in all those countries where performances could be given. Such yogis/yoginis should be interested in what the company is endeavouring to achieve, alert to the possibilities of performances and willing to act as a local channel for donations and contributions which can then be forwarded to the appropriate account. In larger countries, regional representatives may be appropriate.

Shri Mataji has identified the TEV project as one which has Her wholehearted support. It’s now up to us to realize Her desires for it through our own desire. In the first instance, please respond to Ian Maitland-Hume, E-mail [contact-redacted] or fax 44 1361 810741, if you would be interested in becoming a national/regional representative and/or making a donation or regular contribution of any amount to help with the TEV work, so that the company can plan ahead with confidence.

Victor has sent an E-mail to all the leaders so if anyone is interested in helping with funding, etc. they can contact their leaders. The most immediate way to contribute to the next production would be to collect money in every country and transfer it to the Austrian TEV account.

Next Until very recently we were all prepared to start rehearsing Shakespeare’s A Midsummer Night’s Dream. However, Shri Mataji has suggested that we should go to India with Charlie’s Aunt. We are all excited to start work on a new play and have decided to develop a TEV package. This will involve rehearsing more than one production at a time so that different acts can be offered to theatres.

Some of you may remember the clowning act at Sahasrara Puja in ’97. Shri Mataji mentioned her appreciation of this form of theatre, so we have decided to prepare a clown’s play for our next tour as well.

There are so many countries that we need and want to visit. Shri Mataji has also asked us to go to America, so we are preparing this for next year. There is also a festival in South Africa next July. The Yogis there are trying to raise funds for us to go and perform in the communities. Shri Mataji has expressed Her concern over the lack of native South Africans and a community play might be a good way of giving realization en masse. Australian Yogis have also asked us to come.

A TEV seminar was held after Guru Puja, July 12–16. This seminar is a great opportunity for people to learn about theatre and enjoy acting together—professional or beginner.

It is hard to express what it is like to do this work, only to say how much joy and satisfaction are gained when vibrations flow and transform an audience. We bow again and again to our Divine Mother for her blessings, and pray that we become clear instruments to do Her work. We hope to make this a regular bulletin to keep all of you aware of our activities and of forthcoming collective events. Jai Shri Mataji and lots and lots of love from your brothers and sisters from TEV.

Dr. U.C. Rai Tours Europe
Italy, Austria, Belgium and Holland Salute Prof. Dr. Umesh C. Rai

In July this year, Prof. Dr. Umesh C. Rai visited four European countries: Italy, Austria, Belgium and Holland. Prof. Rai is the Director of the International Sahaja Yoga Research Centre, Navi Mumbai, India, founded by Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in 1996. This research and health centre is the only hospital in the world where diseases are cured by Cosmic Vibrations developed through the practice of Sahaja Yoga. On his visit, he not only shared his knowledge of holistic medicine and modern medicine, but was much appreciated for the simplicity and humility of his great heart.

Prof. Rai is in the topmost ranks of the Indian medical world and is a pioneer in the field of holistic medicine. He was President of the Association of Physiologists and Pharmacologists of India, Delhi; Chairman, Post-graduate Research Committee of Lady Hardinge Medical College, Delhi University; and Fellow of the International Medical Sciences Academy. He is also Prof. Emeritus of the Mahatma Gandhi Mission Medical College, Kalamboli, Navi Mumbai.

Being a Fellow of the World Health Organization, Prof. Rai was Visiting Professor at the Institute of Brain Research, Zurich; Physiology Department, Oxford University; Middlesex Hospital Medical School, London; and Cardiovascular Department, Leeds University, Leeds (U.K.). He has, in addition, received the Hari Om Ashram Alembic Award for research in Basic Medical Science in India and the Vladimir Vernidzky Award in Moscow in 1997 for his research in Sahaja Yoga and the use of Cosmic Vibrations to regenerate cells in cases of Type 1 diabetes mellitus.

In 1984, Prof. Rai heard a lecture of Shri Mataji on Sahaja Yoga but was not convinced about the flow of the subtle cool breeze from the palms and top of the head of individuals getting Self Realization through Sahaja Yoga. As such, he took the permission of Her Holiness to do research on Sahaja Yoga to verify its claims. Accordingly, a systematic research study was organized. Three doctoral research projects were taken up jointly by the Physiology Department of Lady Hardinge Medical College and Associated Hospitals in New Delhi: one on the “Physiological effects of Kundalini Awakening by Sahaja Yoga,” one on “The effect of Sahaja Yoga on patients with High Blood Pressure and Bronchial Asthma,” and one on the “Role of Sahaja Yoga in the Management of Idiopathic Epilepsy.” In addition, for research on epilepsy, there was a collaboration with the Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences in Delhi. The doctoral theses on the first two research projects were duly approved by Delhi University for M.D. degrees, and the third one on epilepsy was approved for a Ph.D. degree.

Prof. Rai said that the data collected during these research studies are of such far-reaching relevance that they could revolutionize our understanding of the human psyche, or psychopathology, and of therapeutic processes. They have actually enlightened medical science in the understanding of the autonomic nervous system and particularly of the parasympathetic nervous system. Some observations are highly significant for the discipline of psychiatry and represent a challenge to the current Newtonian Cartesian paradigm of Western science of body that belongs to mind. This has prevented present-day doctors from understanding the psyche of human beings and thereby many illnesses of this era which are psychosomatic cannot be cured by modern medicine. Such common diseases are high blood pressure, bronchial asthma, migraine depressive psychosis, anxiety neurosis, angina, idiopathic epilepsy, diabetes mellitus and even cancer. One has to take medicine all through one’s life. Also, many psychosomatic diseases are treated by tranquilizers that not only cause dependency but also mental problems if taken for a long time.

Prof. Rai has 62 research papers to his credit and has delivered lectures about the medical benefits of Sahaja Yoga in Russia, England, Europe, Australia, U.S.A., Japan, Hong Kong, China, Thailand and Mexico. He said that there was a positive response from the doctors of modern medicine in most of the above countries. They have started appreciating that Sahaja Yoga Meditation and the techniques of clearing the subtle chakras could be quite useful in the management of psychological stress and the above-mentioned psychosomatic diseases.

We in Italy had a strong desire to know about this unique method of treatment from Dr. Rai. A miracle happened. One morning, when I started reading the paper, I was surprised to see that Dr. Umesh C. Rai would be in Milan on July 14th and 15th, Vienna on the 16th and 17th, Brussels on the 20th and 21st, and Turin on the 23rd. Talking about Yoga in Medicine at the public medical conference in Milan, Prof. Rai said that the first piece of evidence available to anyone about Yoga belongs to the Indus Valley civilization, which dates back to the 3rd millennium BC. But Sahaja Yoga is an ideal yoga for modern times because it touches the physical, mental, social and spiritual aspects of one’s health. And Sahaja Yoga can be experienced on our central nervous system.

When he was asked what changes occur in people after practising Sahaja Yoga for about 12 weeks, Prof. Rai said that there is a statistically significant decrease in the adrenaline neurotransmitter (as is evident from decreased VMA), blood lactic acid, heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure. There is also an increase in Galvanic Skin Resistance (GSR) and alpha activity of the brain. All these findings confirm that Sahaja Yoga produces profound physical and mental relaxation and decreases sympathetic activity. In other words, it means that an individual becomes stronger and the stress and strain of hectic life does not affect his health.

The data of the above parameters recorded in people practising Sahaja Yoga for more than two years revealed that their control values were at least 40 per cent to 50 per cent less than those of subjects not doing Sahaja Yoga at all. These lower values put them in a better position, and thereby protect them from the bad effects of stress and strain on the body, keeping them healthier than people who are not practising Sahaja Yoga.

Citing reasons for the sudden shift in the West towards alternative methods, Prof. Rai said that doctors are rethinking their strategy of treating high blood pressure, as there has been no breakthrough and patients have to take medicine throughout their life. In the U.S., 50 million people are estimated to have high blood pressure and only 34 million know it. Out of this, only 27 million seek treatment and only 50 per cent of those seeking treatment achieve normal blood pressure. Based on research data in high blood pressure cases at Lady Hardinge Medical College in New Delhi, Prof. Rai said that hypertensive patients who practised Sahaja Yoga along with anti-hypertensive drugs became normal in 16 weeks’ time. They stopped taking drugs and could maintain normal blood pressure simply by doing Sahaja Yoga.

Another group of hypertensive patients who were only on drugs and did not do Sahaja Yoga could not become normal and had to take drugs (maintenance dose) to keep their blood pressure within normal limits.

Prof. Rai has also written a book, Medical Science Enlightened, in which he has juxtaposed Sahaja Yoga with medicine for the prevention and treatment of psychosomatic diseases, including its role in heart disease, cancer and AIDS.

Prof. Rai gave examples of patients who had recently been cured at the International Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre: two Americans, one with dilated cardioma, and one with depressive psychosis; a Belgian man with high blood pressure; a South African man with Asthma; and an Indian lady who was cured of infertility due to a cystic ovary. On being asked how Sahaja Yoga works, Prof. Rai said it is difficult to explain, but as per research data, it modulates the secretions of neurotransmitters, which further act as neuro-immune modulators and thereby even help to treat immune mediated diseases. Moreover, the vibrations developed by Sahaja Yoga are self-organizing, self-regenerating and rejuvenating, and cure various diseases where modern medicine is helpless.

On the basis of these results, it was possible to confirm that the daily practice of Sahaja Yoga was an effective treatment for arterial hypertension, angina and myocardial coronary. Once the patient’s blood pressure returned to within normal limits, it could be maintained just with meditation! “In all types of ailments,” explained Prof. Rai, “curing the most serious cases depends on three factors: what state the illness has reached, how far the primordial energy has been awakened, and how much effort the patient puts into his own self-healing.”

The beneficial effects of Sahaja Yoga Meditation do not only apply to the physical, but also to the mental, social and spiritual aspects. In fact, with the practice of Sahaja Yoga, the individual undergoes not just an improvement in health, but also an internal transformation which leads him to become more co-operative and more sociable, with this also applying to behavioural disorders connected to stress.

The press has shown interest in the message of Professor Rai. Several articles came out in the countries he visited and others are awaiting publication this autumn. In Italy and Austria, he gave interviews on the radio (Radio Popolare and Blue Danube Radio, respectively). The Milanese journalist Tiziana Ricci received her self-realization from Prof. Rai. A few Viennese journalists who helped at a conference of Prof. Rai’s at the United Nations asked to receive their self-realization and then decided to meet at the same place every first Monday of the month to meditate together with other representatives of UNO.

It was also very interesting to see the interest shown by the medical profession, for whom the July meetings were specifically arranged. One example was the large number of doctors at the conference in Turin, thanks to the efforts of the local Sahaja Yogis who placed posters in hospitals and health centres. At the end of this conference a scientific debate followed, with the particularly noteworthy participation of Dr. Bruno Bruni, head of the Department of Diabetes at the most important hospital in Turin, La Molinette. He stated his appreciation for the results obtained through Sahaja Yoga methods and foresaw great possibilities in the synergy between orthodox and yoga treatments. At the end of the conference, 14 doctors expressed their intention to deepen their knowledge of these new yoga techniques which restabilize the energy balance, leading to a healthy psychosomatic state. Several of them asked if they could receive their Self-Realization straight away.

And the Sahaja Yogis? Those who had anxiously awaited the arrival of Prof. Rai to talk about big and small problems of their own or their families were surprised to find someone who was more than a doctor, who was a very great Yogi. They were honoured to be able to meditate collectively with this calm and powerful personality. The more fortunate were able to ask advice directly from Dr. Rai. In Belgium, some 40 Sahaja Yogis had individual meetings with him and received, apart from valuable advice, his appreciation for the level of the Belgium collective which, he said, “will certainly succeed in saving its country.” Then there were many collective meetings in which Dr. Rai, after leading the meditation, replied to many questions from Yogis.

In Europe, the next visit of Prof. Rai is eagerly awaited, knowing that the techniques of treating the chakras can be further studied in the light of his experience. On the other hand, those who went to the Hospital at Belapur, Navi Mumbai (which Shri Mataji considers a precious gem in the tapestry that She has woven in India) have benefitted greatly in their health and strength. The doctors of the health centre, under the guidance of Prof. Rai, have used Sahaja Yoga techniques in full awareness of the union of mind, body and spirit.

Thank You Professor Rai, thank You Beloved Shri Mataji.

— Paola Capudi, Italy

Some Questions and Answers: Professor Rai with Sahaja Yogis
Belgium, July 22, 1998

Can one work with a candle on a cold liver?
Dr. Rai answered by insisting that one should never use fire on the right side and also not on the central channel. Fire is reserved for the left side and when the left side is cleared out, the right side is lighter.

About thyroid problems:
This is caused by the imbalance of the right and left channels, Vishuddhi and Agnya. Clearing of these chakras and channels is very helpful in treating thyroid problems.

About food:
To vibrate food is not enough to neutralize pesticides. If possible, one can eat organic vegetables and fruit.

Alzheimer’s disease:
It is a sickness affecting the neurons and is an incurable disease. Vibrations can improve the condition.

Mental problems:
They should be treated in a Sahaja Yoga Hospital, like the Health Centre in Navi Mumbai.

We were very much surprised to hear about “Ayurvedic” doctors who are established in Luxembourg, Zurich and Holland, who have treated some cancer patients with a certain kind of “ayurvedic medicine,” so-called Pancha-Karma. The doctors have a guru called Maharishi and they follow Transcendental Meditation. They give herbs as medicine called Amruta, which come from a factory in New Delhi. Their treatments badly attack the Mooladhara and Swadhishthana, and it is impossible to vibrate these herbs, even if you put them in front of Our Holy Mother’s picture.

Commenting on this, Dr. Rai said that preliminary research on the effect of Sahaja Yoga on cancer is very encouraging. It has been seen that the practice of Sahaja Yoga and the activation of the Centre Heart produce more natural killer cells which can kill the cancer cells in our body. As such, Sahaja Yoga can prevent the occurrence of cancer and also helps in the treatment of cancer. One should not follow any system blindly. If a person finds that his Mooladhara or Swadhishthana chakras are blocked, then it is clear that this system does not suit you.

Milan, July 14, 1998
Is it possible that a person can have both left side and right side problems?
Dr. Rai said that a person may be left-sided and then suddenly go to the right side. In the morning you find patients on the left side, but in the afternoon when you see the same patient, you find him on the right side. When you need to treat the right side, you have to use water, ice or footsoaking in cool water. You can do both the treatments, but not at the same time. When the left side is more, then treat the left side first; when the right side is more, then treat the right side first. One has to find out which is the root cause of the disease, whether it is the left side or the right side, and whichever side is the root cause should be treated first.

What about those who suffer from depression, hallucinations, and have been taking some medications?
Many cases have come to our Centre and practically all have been cured. Sahaja Yoga is one of the best ways to treat cases of depressive psychosis. Here in Milan, it may be very difficult because it requires a very drastic type of treatment. It may not be possible for you to cure yourself by doing yourself clearing the chakras because you are not in that state of thoughtless awareness. The person who is doing the clearing should be able to feel the vibrations and for the patient himself it is not possible.

But if somebody who can feel the vibrations treats him and he gets the treatment in the morning and the evening, I think there is no reason why he should not be cured.

Problems of the retina:
We have to see the degree of the detachment of the retina, but with Sahaja Yoga many patients with retinal detachment have benefitted. It is difficult to make a statement unless and until I know exactly how much detachment there is and where, in which part of the retina the detachment is there, what the state of the chakras is and which are blocked. Then only is it possible to say how much you can be benefitted. Do not take it lightly, because it is something quite serious and one should take the appropriate steps to get it treated. You should get to the opthamologist so that the diagnosis can be made, and then show it to an expert Sahaja Yogi and take his opinion and only then start the treatment. It should not be left as is for a long time.

Treatment of asthma attacks:
Asthmatic attacks are a right heart problem. Clearing the right heart and putting ice on the liver are general treatments. If you find that you are not benefitted by these techniques, then come to the Centre to see what other permutations and combinations are affecting you and then the treatment depends on that. If the asthmatic crisis is very serious, you should do whatever the doctor suggests.

If it is not Status-Asthmaticus, then with Sahaja Yoga you can be easily cured. This has been shown in the research study on asthmatics at Sucheta Kriplani Hospital in Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi.

About food:
Prof. Rai said that it is important to eat a diet rich in fibre. People who eat only chicken, ham, sausages, eggs, etc., and very few vegetables are more prone to develop colon cancer. People who eat more butter, fried things and a lot of eggs develop arteriosclerosis, which makes them more prone to develop angina, high blood pressure and heart attacks. As per the Sahaja Yoga hypothesis of H.H. Shri Mataji, left-sided people should eat more proteins and right-sided people should eat more carbohydrates.

How do you explain a Sahaja Yogi getting sick and dying of cancer?
Normally, a Sahaja Yogi remains mostly in good health and is able to prevent many psychosomatic diseases and many epidemic diseases. The reason for this is very simple. By doing Sahaja Yoga, the defence mechanism of the body becomes stronger and that prevents the occurrence of diseases, including cancer. However, at the same time, it is not surprising to see a Sahaja Yogi once in a while sick with cancer. The reason is very simple. Sahaja Yogis are very compassionate and loving people. Being in Collective Consciousness, if they find a person suffering from an illness that is not cured by the doctors of modern medicine, they immediately offer their help. First they give Self-Realization and then start treating. In doing so, sometimes they treat someone with a very badly caught Left Swadhishthana and Ekadesha Rudra who has been diagnosed with cancer.

If the Sahaja Yogi is not deep in Sahaja Yoga and adequate precautionary measures are not taken to treat such a case, then one catches and develops cancer. Shri Mataji has said, if I remember correctly, that in general, cancer and schizophrenic patients should not be treated by Sahaja Yogis. It would be advisable to refer such patients to the International Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Centre.

The full address is: International Sahaja Yoga Research & Health Centre, Plot No. 1, Sector 8, C.B.D. Belapur, Navi Mumbai, India 400614.

India Tour 1998
December
15 Charter flight from Milan via Moscow
16 Arrive in Delhi. Music Program.
17 Unity International Award
18 Public Program in Delhi
19–21 Travel to Ganapatipule by train
21–30 Ganapatipule Seminar and travel to Kalwe
31 Puja at Kalwe

January
2 Charter flight returns to Milan via Moscow

To sign up for the charter flight:
FAX: 0039-0761-571329
Phone: 0039-06-82654161 or 0039-06-82654160

For all other tour details contact the India Tour Committee in London: [contact-redacted]

Copyright © 2026 Nirmala Vidya Amruta. All Rights Reserved. Privacy | Terms of Use | Amruta is supported by the WordPress Multilingual Plugin. | oska.dev
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
About WordPress
Nirmala Vidya Amruta
Hi, Prashant handge
Search