SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 1998-08-16
TALK: Nirmala Vidya Amruta
LOCATION/EVENT: in-mexico-city
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:23:17
CHARS: 68076
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
Post navigation
Previous post:
The Divine Cool Breeze, Aug-Sept 1998, Vol. 12, Nos. 7 and 8
Next post:
The Divine Cool Breeze, December 1998, Vol. 12, No. 11
The Divine Cool Breeze, Oct-Nov 1998, Vol. 12, Nos. 9 and 10
Books online | All Books
Thursday, October 1st, 1998
DCB
Magazine
Online, PDF
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English
Google Drive
The Divine Cool Breeze
Volume 12, Nos. 9 and 10
International Newsletter
October and November 1998

“Your witness state will increase, and when in the collective all of you have that witness state, you can do wonders without doing anything, without saying anything, without acting. Only your presence, itself, can work it out.”

— Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Krishna Puja, Cabella, August 16, 1998

The Divine Cool Breeze
Krishna Puja Talk Synopsis
Krishna Puja 1998
FRIDAY, AUGUST 14
SATURDAY, AUGUST 15
SUNDAY, AUGUST 16
Invocation for the Cleansing of America
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
Ganesha Puja Talk Synopsis
News from Around the World
India: Unity International Foundation Award
Israel: A Divine Miracle!
Australia: Sahaja Asthma Research Yields Remarkable Results
Mexico: Sahaja Yoga Medical Conference in Mexico City
USA: Sahaja Yoga Medical Conference at NIH in Washington, D.C.
Krishna Puja Talk Synopsis
Cabella, Italy, August 16, 1998

The power of Shri Krishna gives you a witness state. In these days of Kali Yuga and complete confusion of the value system, all kinds of turmoil make a very complex condition exist. “The state of witnessing is only possible through meditation. You reach the state of thoughtless awareness. It is combined together. Now the witness state is such a state where you just do not react. If you react, then the problem starts.”

We react through our ego or through our conditioning. Otherwise, there is no way to react…. For example, there is a beautiful carpet here…. If I use my ego I’ll start thinking, ‘From where did they get it? …What was the need to put it here?'” It goes on like that. In my conditioning I would say that this colour is not suited for Krishna Puja. This conditioning is built up within us.

“All our problems of our conditioning are really horrible. For example, racialism…. In America it’s very much more — you can feel it…. Why do we react to this kind of horrible hatred for another community or another colour which is only skin deep?” With rationality you can explain why you don’t like some group of people. Americans must know that they are all immigrants who took away the land of the Red Indians. Their reaction was that those who are not white-complexioned are to be condemned, tortured. “If they are by nature violent then also this conditioning of violence comes in…. They have killed ruthlessly so many people thinking that they have a right to go into any country and kill everyone and take the land that is not their own. Actually, land doesn’t belong to anybody as such.” This also happened with the British in India. If white people think they can rule the black with their greater cunning, they cannot develop a witness state.

These kinds of conditionings are like a plague and move from one country to another where some people think they’re superior, and make others look inferior. Also, there are people who accept an inferior position where they should be equal.

“Krishna is the ruler of America. He, himself, was a dark person,” yet in the country where He rules, we have racialism. “All their sports are managed by the blacks… 99% are black people…. They can sing so well that no white people can compete with them. It’s a full justice done to the colour.” And if you take out the Asians, all doctors, nurses, architects, accountants will disappear.

“Colour has nothing to do with your intelligence, with your value system, with your spirit. We are here to achieve our spirituality. The spirit doesn’t understand colour because it is so superficial and it is so very cruel to condemn someone for the colour.”

“Every action has a reaction.” The blacks are reacting “and their reaction can be very dangerous…. They are now thinking they must rise and oppose this domination.” But in their own countries where they are all black people — with some little variations in colour — they form groups and they start cutting each others’ throats. “It’s not like Kauravas and Pandavas. It’s not two types of people absolutely opposite…. They’re all negative whether they’re white or black.”

“This violence is growing so much. I think violence is the only weapon they use now to express themselves. Even the slightest violence is sinful, and this kind of a violence in the eyes of Shri Krishna is absolutely to be punished very badly…. Hatred is an outcome of ego. When the ego starts acting, it collects all these things like hatred, possessiveness, anger, violence.” This blinds the person.

How does this ego build up? “Mostly it is due to reactions. Also, it is due to the conditioning.” If children are told to hate certain people, when they grow up they start showing that hatred. There’s no justification for this kind of a behaviour. Human beings have to have human qualities, and that is possible only if you learn how to just witness and not to react. People still do violent things, or they enjoy watching violent acts, like bullfights or violent films.

But if you are in a witness state, and if you watch any such things that are happening, it will subside. If you are in a witness state, even if there is an accident, you can save the person, you can help the person very actively. “There is no fear at all once you learn how to have the state of witnessing. Because when you are not witnessing, you get disturbed, you get upset, you get excited. You may join, also, this wrong type of people. But if you are in a state of witnessing — that, itself, is a power. And that witnessing state helps you to win over so many difficulties of other people…. This is the best way to bring nonviolence.”

“But witness state is not a mental state. It is a state of a spiritual ascent where you become a witness. Best way to practise witness state is not to criticize anyone.” People who criticize others can’t criticize themselves. They don’t see what wrong they have done to others because they think they have a right to criticize others — and they enjoy this criticism. “Actually, there’s nothing to be criticized…. You have no right to criticize anyone or anything. But some people think if you do not criticize, then it will go on like this and it will never stop. It’s not that…. With that enlightened attention you can just watch and stop the nonsense that is there. But we are always conscious that we are something great and we have to do this and we have to do that. Under these circumstances, what happens is that you become another problem. Because what can you do? You can’t do anything. But what you can do is to watch.”

“By watching and by just seeing things as they are, you really develop a very different state of being.” Firstly, memory loss is much less because what you see is so much in the mind, like a photo. “While if you react onto everything, your memory becomes horrible.” People have a habit of reacting. This kind of people can be very dangerous in a collective, because with that kind of a reacting nature, they have to do something. They are combined together for a purpose, for some reactions which all of them have built up. And some people who are very well developed into this kind of behaviour can collect lots of people and do any amount of harm to others — like Hitler.

“Once you start losing your witness state, you can fall into negative collectivity. And thus this negative collectivity acts in such a bad manner that all the conflicts of the world, all the problems of the world, perhaps, are related with this. So as Sahaja Yogis… we should not react.” If you see something wrong, you meditate on that. “If somebody is unkind to you, at that moment do not react. Afterwards, when that person is quieter, you tell him.” Gradually you may win over such people and make them understand that what they’re doing is wrong.

The reaction to anything which is stupid — built-in reactions — also can be very self-destroying. You can’t understand how a man of Mr. Clinton’s stature should have such reactions. Now he’s in trouble — very shameful. This comes from a very great indulgence into reactions. “This is one of the biggest problems of today’s culture, especially in all the developed countries — that all the time men are looking at women, women are looking at men…. Because they have some inferiority complex in them that they want to attract the attention of everyone…. Horrible things are done these days to attract the attention of others, to get the sympathy of others — to give you importance.” It’s a very common disease of modern life to seek this empty importance. It’s a waste of energy to keep thinking about how you should look. All of God’s creations are unique. “Whatever you are, it’s all right. Why do you want to look like another person.”

“Now you being Sahaja Yogis, your worth is great. You have come here to emancipate human beings from these silly ideas and foolish ways.” As a result of diversified attention and funny reactions, individually and collectively, a new kind of value system has been created. Women don’t want to look like a mother; they think they have to be extremely attractive. Same for the men. If there is anything within you that can qualify you as a great man, it will be showing. You don’t have to advertise. “So that indifference if you have towards the public opinion I think you can achieve a lot. Most of the frustrations will disappear.”

“In Sahaja Yoga, also, I have seen people want to show off a lot. I know who does that. But they should know. Once you do not react to outside, you start reacting to inside and introspection will start properly. When you see yourself, you’ll be amazed how admiring you are, how happy you are. Now if you go beyond that a little more, then you don’t think about these things, you just become thoughtless and you just stand up as a person who is respected, whose company is wanted, who is loved and who is cared for.”

It is a kind of a state I’m talking about. Arjuna wanted Shri Krishna to be on his side, more than any army, because he knew that Shri Krishna would be there in a witness state. Without fighting, His own power would act to win the war.

“So this power of witnessing you all should develop…. Stop reaction about everything.” You will find yourself a very powerful person in the sense that you’ll have no ambitions, no desires, no special fondness — just you are witnessing the drama. It’s very interesting to witness because then you understand the humour and the stupidity behind everything. “You understand also how people have been so violent and you’ll just laugh at it…. Your witness state will increase, and when in the collective all of you have that witness state, you can do wonders without doing anything, without saying anything, without acting. Only your presence, itself, can work it out. I don’t say that it will have effect on everyone, but most of the people.”

“Even in Sahaja Yoga I have known people who are very ambitious. They want to become leaders…. Actually it’s all a myth…. Once you learn how to witness, you’ll know the myth, you will know the absurdity, you’ll know the maya. So to overcome the problems of personality, the best thing is to witness. Practise witnessing.” Before talking, just start witnessing. “It’s a very, very satisfying attitude.”

Shri Krishna’s greatest power was that He was a witnessing personality. Without taking a sword in His hands or talking about fighting, He helped the Pandavas to win the war. Through His Gita He tells us what we have to do to win the war over evil. If you read Gita now from this angle, “you’ll be amazed to find that everywhere He is like a witness, describing everything, whatever He sees.” He told how to become sthita pragya, the one who is in the witness state. He starts with the best, then He tells you about the three aspects.

First he talks about karma. “Many people get stuck at that point — that whatever karmas we are doing, we’ll get the punyas out of it.” But He didn’t say that. He says that, “Whatever karmas you have to do, you can do it, but leave the results to the Divine Power… because Divine Power knows best what is for you…. If you think you have done something good — you have served somewhere to the poor, you have done something really good for the women, or anything — the result of that, you leave it at the Feet of the Divine Power. Means that you don’t build up an ego for whatever you have done.”

Then He has written about gnyana which means where you know. “But that doesn’t mean you go on reading books…. You have to be a Sahaja Yogi by which you know so many things through vibrations. Gnyana means that you must know your Self. If you do not know your Self, you do not know anything.”

“Lastly, He talks about bhakti. Bhakti is devotion…. He says you must do ananya bhakti. Ananya means when there is not the other…. The real bhakti is only possible when you become one with the Divine. Otherwise, it’s just a show. So the bhakti part also comes after Self-Realization.” In bhakti, “when you want to give something, it is your love which is important, not how much you paid, what value you have spent. It is the love with which you do it.”

“Your value system should be based on such things like love. Where you can get love, you should be attached to that person. Where you get a realized soul, you should be attached to them, and not to worldly people who think no end of themselves and think they are great. They may be, but to you as Sahaja Yogis, it’s the love of people which should be respected, should be understood and felt.” But if you have no witness state, considerations like how much money or possessions a person has will be there. “But in a witness state, you will understand that you’ll get vibrations from this person. You will understand that person is spiritual and that’s how you will stick to such a person. You will not go for artificial things, but genuine personalities that are there. May God bless you all.”

[Before Shri Mataji left the hall, She said:]
“I would say that after this Puja, I expected all of you to keep quiet. But everybody was talking. I don’t know why, what had happened to you. You must enjoy the silence within yourself. I hope you’ll understand that. Thank you.”

Krishna Puja 1998
Krishna Puja 1998 was held in Albera, near the quaint village of Cabella Ligure, Italy. Yogis and yoginis from every part of the Earth gathered together to celebrate and worship Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in the form of Lord Shri Krishna. The puja was hosted by about 150 Americans who came from North and South America: Canada, USA, Brazil, Colombia, Argentina, Peru, and other countries within Shri Krishna’s vast territory.

Stage backdrops were brought from South America, Canada and USA. Each of the three nights in the hangar featured a different backdrop.

For the first time, all puja stage preparation, food preparation, serving, accomodation, parking and river splashing were all close together, alongside the river. The new arrangement, set up by Shri Mataji, puts all of the main puja activities in Albera, the village just before Cabella. Below the main road to Cabella, and extending along the bank of the river, there is now a men’s tent area, then the food preparation and serving area (including half of a 200-year-old stone house recently purchased by Shri Mataji). This was the first time that this new house was used to prepare the food for the seminar. Serving food was fun and very easy, since the large pots only had to be carried a few metres from the fire to the serving tables.

The tent and cooking areas each connect to a large parking area which is out of sight of the main road. Beyond the food area is the access road, then the hangar where the ladies stay. Below the hangar is a flat open area which Shri Mataji requested not be used for parking. And below everything is the cool, refreshing river. There was time every day for the hosts to take a break from cooking, serving, constructing or cleaning, and sink blissfully into the reinvigorating and calming river current.

The new layout is completed with a villa up on the side of the mountain in Centrassi, a pleasant walk from the hangar, between the hangar and Cabella. Shri Mataji purchased the villa so that host country organizers would have a place to stay together near the hangar, to be able to coordinate more easily. The view from the balcony of the villa is breathtaking — helping busy organizers to be in thoughtless awareness. It is a quaint, rustic yet spacious modern house where we prepared collective meals before and after the seminar weekend, and had a chance to strengthen the collectivity among the Americas.

FRIDAY, AUGUST 14
The festivities began on Friday with dinner served outside below the warm evening sky. The evening was full of happy reunions, especially those between the children of the summer camp and their parents. 150 or so children had participated in the camp at Daglio — two weeks of beautiful experiences with the guidance of their loving aunties and uncles, all living in Daglio where you awake each morning to the mist slowly rising off the adjacent mountaintops. Their days were spent enjoying song and dance and crafts.

After dinner 800 or so of us gathered in the hangar to share in the creativity of our American brothers and sisters as they presented us with a very lively entertainment program. We were blessed with the arrival of Shri Mataji, and then Her instruments came to life in front of Her expressing the creativity flowing from within. There were several performances by the South American yogis, including displays of regional costumes and dance styles. We were also treated to songs performed by the Yuva Shakti and a devotional, moving classical Indian music performance by Deepak Varma. There was also a performance by the yogis of Vancouver of a lively Indian bhangra dance in colourful costumes. The festivities lasted well into the night, but at one point we all found a few hours of sleep before the next day.

SATURDAY, AUGUST 15
Saturday was a day of cleansing in preparation for the puja. Many yogis and yoginis could be found footsoaking (and full-body soaking!) in the cool waters. The day was sprinkled with a few raindrops. During the daytime hours throughout the weekend, some yogis bought gifts for their Rakhi brothers and sisters. The sweetly offered gifts included lavender from Shri Mataji’s garden, the powerful music of Nirmal Sangeet Sarita on a new cassette, the crafts of our brothers and sisters, or pictures of Her Holiness in all Her Majesty.

In the late afternoon, everyone gathered within the hangar to perform havan to all aspects of Shri Krishna, praying to clear the land of the Vishuddhi of adharma. The havan was very powerful, identifying various aspects of distortion within the Americas. We asked: O Devi, strengthen us as Your divine instruments for the cleansing of the land of Shri Krishna. Let America be the source of ongoing merriment, song and dance. Lord Krishna’s flute playing the delicate music of the Divine will cure the Spirit of America. We only ask that America starts to listen to His divine rasa, the beautiful poetry of His rhythm. In so doing, let America — North, Central, and South — become obedient to the inspiration of the Divine. He is Nirmala Gamya, accessible only through You.

What powerful vibrations flooded the hangar as the whole world prayed for America. Our global attention focussed on the crippling nature of materialism and greed. With those two evils destroyed, what a beautiful future America has to look forward to!

Saturday night was the continuation of the entertainment program. (There was too much for one night alone.) We were again floating on a cloud of joy as Shri Mataji was again present in the audience. We were privileged to hear the flute playing of Anand Murdeshwar. There was more dancing, including a classical piece highlighting Radha and Krishna (one dancer was from the west coast of Canada, the other from the east coast of USA). The hangar was filled with laughter during a humorous skit about a future Sahaja Yogi president of the United States. (Shri Mataji was noticed enjoying the skit very much.) A theatrical depiction of several scenes from Shri Krishna’s life, complete with original songs and choreography, was well received. As dandia stick dancers went to bed Sunday morning, the rest of us rose for meditation and preparation for Puja!

SUNDAY, AUGUST 16
The Puja began after a late lunch. We all settled down nicely before the arrival of the Queen. As might be expected at Krishna Puja, the expected sequence of the parts of the puja was changed by Shri Mataji. She requested that the commemorative card containing the 108 names of Shri Krishna be passed out at the beginning of the puja. When the names were read, everyone in the hangar was able to repeat each name without any difficulties. One of the names had been changed by Shri Mataji before the puja. She wrote the corrected name on the card: Mormuketdhari (He has a peacock feather adorning His head).

She spoke to us about the aspect of witnessing and not reacting. We were led gently through the steps of becoming detached from our actions, deepening ourselves through the principle of witnessing ourselves and life as it happens. The Puja was incredibly powerful, full of so many lessons and guidelines.

A hand-made decorative rakhi was offered to Shri Mataji. Artfully expressing the rupa of Shri Krishna, She held a pure gold sudarshan and then a flute. Fresh butter was offered in a large painted pot, which was later distributed as prasad. Several commemorative gifts were offered to Shri Mataji to vibrate for those who attended the puja: an ink stamp of the Shri Chakra which is the symbol of Vishwa Nirmala Dharma, some hand-made miniature flutes, and hand-cut and painted dandia sticks. After receiving presents from all of the countries, Shri Mataji offered gifts to all of the host country yogis who attended the puja.

The puja ceremony felt shorter than the previous year’s Krishna puja. However, at the time we decided the puja was ‘over,’ after the Aarti, Shri Mataji was still seated on the stage in the hangar, accepting gifts from various countries. Many of us began to chat and scatter our attention. Before leaving the hangar, Shri Mataji Herself took the microphone and reminded us to remain silent and in a meditative mood while She was still there. We had collectively gotten tricked by Her gentle, non-assertive maya and forgotten that we were still in the darshan of the Goddess Adi Shakti Herself. After She had left, She instructed the world leaders to go back and talk to the collective about the protocol of respect in Her presence. This message has not been emphasized in recent years, and perhaps many people are not aware of how important it is to put all of our attention on Shri Mataji while She is there to absorb vibrations.

We all boarded buses and planes for our respective countries soon after the puja. Those of us who were lucky enough to stay a few extra days went into Cabella and relaxed, enjoying the company of faces both old and new. We shared the fun and joy of having been in the presence of the Adi Shakti and able to share vibrations with hundreds of people.

Having returned home, the change from within that happened to each of us that weekend stays with us and enhances our being every day. In the days and weeks afterwards, we have had lessons and experiences which have enhanced our ability to witness and not react and express our true collectivity. May we continue to be Shri Krishna’s Warriors of JOY, today and everyday!

— Melanie Rothenberg, Jack Cohen, Mark Taylor, USA

Invocation for the Cleansing of America
Om twameva sakshat Shri Ganesha sakshat Shri Radha Krishna sakshat Shri Adi Shakti Namoh Namah.

I.
O Devi, strengthen us as Your divine instruments for the cleansing of the land of Shri Krishna. Let America be the source of ongoing merriment, song and dance. Lord Krishna’s flute playing the delicate music of the Divine will cure the Spirit of America. We only ask that America starts to listen to Shri Krishna’s Divine Rasa, the beautiful poetry of His rhythm. In so doing, let America — North, Central, and South — become obedient to the inspiration of the Divine. He is Nirmala Gamya, accessible only through You.

Shri Krishna, you are dark — dark as night — and in your land, people of all colours live in harmony. Language is sweet and easily understood in Your Kingdom. Words bring no sorrow. As you are the strongest and most protective Father, so too do You create playfulness and mirth. Your Leela brings joy and childlike delight.

Shri Krishna, Supreme Lord of the Land:
You are the charioteer who brings us to our destination of Union with the Divine. Inspired by Our Holy Mother in Her form as Radha, You use the weapons of Joy and Detachment to conquer the negativity.

Your land is so rich and grand: All of its nature is painted with splendour. Let this land again become the Grand Palace of Delight: nature and city glowing in the bliss of Sahaj culture.

O Devi, You have given us powers — weapons of joy — to fight against the sins of greed, materialism and social confusion. Let these powers manifest the power of Nirananda, the absolutely pure joy.

II.
“There is a war that opens the doors of heaven, Arjuna. Happy the warriors whose fate is to fight such war.”
— Bhagavad Gita, Ch. 2, 32.

Shri Vishnumaya announces Shri Krishna’s coming, and Shri Yeshoda gives us the respect needed for America to become righteous once again.

For years we have, like children, tried to walk in the footsteps of yoga, but now the battle is at its peak. We can no longer continue to just hold back the battalions of negativities assaulting our doors.

O Devi by Your grace, victory is sure, especially as the yogis gain mastery over themselves, and in confidence the battle is fought. We have all been prone to weakness on the Kurukshetra of life. Release us from Karpanya, the cowardice that allows us to justify our weaknesses.

Shri Krishna, Your planet Saturn is the teacher of lessons. Having had many hard lessons, we ask that our citizens return to the ways of dharma, worshipping sin no more. In so doing, grant and restore protection from harsh lessons, illness, and social disorder.

With a sense of urgency, we ask that the negativities attacking America’s ascent be cleansed so that Shri Krishna’s quality of Gruhananda, that of giving joy to the household, may manifest. The original native peoples of the American continent had this sense of harmony and inner self contentment, but the conquerors of this land have brought disorder and discontent.

The women of North, Central and South America pledge (and most especially the women of the United States) to look deeply into the mirrors of their souls. Let them surrender the ego and conditionings that are preventing them from being Gruha Lakshmis in every way.

As a flower opens and gives to its last moment, let all the ladies, at whatever stage of life they are in, bloom more fully in graciousness and subtle powers.

May all the people on this great continent achieve satisfaction of the Spirit.

O Devi, By Your Grace, please conquer by the Power of Joy:

The habit of wearing clothing by women that does not give respect to Draupadi’s sari.
The aggressiveness of women seeking to be the same as men.
The idea in American womens’ minds that caring for a family is a lesser goal than a career.
The idea of pursuing a career without also building up the Gruha Lakshmi qualities in a woman.
The despair that blocks the ascent of America’s women and blocks their love for the responsibilities of caring for a home and family.
The habit of not cooking at home that is weakening the Nabhi of America.
The lack of satisfaction that prevents love.
Any attacks on marriage that prevent family life from flowering.
The ego that resists the beauty of the women’s role in home and family.
The ego that insists that men and women are the same. They are equal, but different in nature.
The damage to the mother-daughter relationship that has prevented girls from learning from their mothers.
The lack of satisfaction about life that creates greed and the desire for pleasure from things.
Miserliness that is masked as savings.
The credit and loan system that enslaves America to the banks, and prevents satisfaction.
The use of credit cards that impoverishes in the name of wealth.
All the aspects of materialism being spread throughout the entire world by the United States.
The economic problems caused by people’s greed that keep the attention on the material level.
Negativity preventing the grace of handiwork and creativity from manifesting in modern American women.
The weakness that makes women pressure others instead their being like Shri Lakshmi standing on the lotus.
All obstacles that prevent the gentle, enduring love of family.
All obstacles to the true qualities of womanhood transforming our societies.
III.
O Parampuja, enlighten fully the powers of the Krishna Tattwa so that we may fulfill our roles in the Leela of the truth that you have so graciously let the yogis join.

We pledge to sow the seed of Self-Realization throughout America — North, Central and South. Let America become One, a unified land.

We pray that political oppression be dissolved so that Sahaja Yoga can meet its destiny as the vehicle of Truth. For until political oppression stops, many are not free to hear your message or deepen their Self-Realization.

Release all the citizens of our land from poor discrimination, the obstacle of the Hamsa. Such was Arjuna’s battle. Let America be the land of discretion once again.

If we are to fight for the joy and for the Kshema (well-being) of all who live in this land, then our Vishnu Tattwa, the vibration of Dharma, must be in order. If activated, this Tattwa would help us prevent extreme behavior, so much of which is rampant in our societies.

All the yogis pledge to open their hearts, and, at whatever cost, to stand by the moral values that Shri Krishna represents. We pledge to place the collective interest first, to always be willing to understand others, and always to be generous in this land of wealth. All of this is possible through the detachment that Shri Krishna brings, and through the comfort of the spirit that fills us with Divine compassion.

IV.
May the chains of materialism fall away from America as did the chains which fell from the wrists of Lord Krishna’s father, Vasudeva, when he was held captive.

May the closed doors of America’s heart open just as the prison doors flew open to free Vasudeva.

May the faith of the yogis remain strong as did Vasudeva’s as he fled prison to protect Baby Krishna. Carrying miraculous Baby Krishna on his head wrapped in a cloth and a basket, Vasudeva crossed the River Yamuna. The waters rose high, yet the child Krishna had only to point his foot towards the river, and it immediately fell, and the waters became passable again.

O Devi, give us the infinite powers of Joy of Baby Krishna to conquer our own River Yamuna which has become a joyless river of despair for so many people who live in this land — despair that is preventing America from recognizing Shri Adi Shakti Nirmala Devi.

In all the countries throughout America — North, Central and South — remember Shri Krishna’s call to Arjuna — Arise, O great warrior, arise!

O Devi, at this time of the coming millenium, at this beginning of Satya Yuga, let a new call resound for all to hear:
Arise, O Warrior of Joy, Arise!
Arise, Anandvira, Arise!

May all the yogis become true warriors of joy.
Jai Shri Americeshwari
Shri Adi Shakti Mataji
Shri Nirmala Devi Namoh Namah!

V.
List of Negativities for Shri Krishna Havan:

O Devi, by your grace please conquer by the Power of Joy:

The American individualist archetype that prevents surrender.
The seriousness of intellectuals and scientists that prevents them from experiencing Shri Krishna’s joy.
The tobacco industry and its false research on the terrible effects of smoking.
The proliferation of plastics which is emptying homes of natural goods.
The overuse of computers causing the hands, the instrument of the Vishuddhi, to become dull and insensitive.
The export of butter products that makes it expensive to buy butter in Shri Krishna’s land.
The poisoning of the dairy industry by chemical additives.
The use of pharmaceutical drugs to create behavioural change without true healing.
The negativity preventing Sahaj culture from taking root in the brains of America’s people.
The many religious myths in America that do not lead to the Central Channel.
The social conditionings that perpetuate attachment to false beliefs and ideals.
The false ideas about the New Age that are preventing Americans from seeing the Kundalini Herself standing before them.
The colonistic attitudes that allowed the slaughter of the Native Peoples of America.
The mercantile and racist beliefs that continue to affect the whole continent, North, Central and South.
The poverty that continues to force people to flee Central America.
The drug cartels enslaving people throughout the North and South American continents.
The inauspicious use of flowers to smuggle drugs from South to North America.
The ethnic conflicts over language in Canada.
Dictatorial governments in the Vishuddhi.
The expansion of multi-national corporations that is eliminating American products in American economies.
The misuse of natural resources, especially that of nuclear power in the United States.
The pro-right, pro-Nazi and extremist movements trying to take hold in our societies.
The arrogance of the United States which sees itself as superior to other countries.
The media’s influence in promoting violence and social disorder.
The media’s influence eroding the maryadas in all aspects of social life.
Hollywood’s offences against the purity and graciousness of film and video.
Anti-joy art that is modern but without spirit.
The early sophistication of our children that takes away their innocence and wisdom.
The negativity turning young people to crime.
The anti-melodious music that blares in the ears of teenagers everyday.
Aggressive use of the voice in the Vishuddhi.
Forms of dance that confuse the dharma and create false collectivity.
The confusion of male and female roles in American society.
The aggressiveness of women seeking to be the same as men.
The popularization of designer-label goods in the United States that are sold worldwide.
The habit of wearing clothing by women that does not give respect to Draupadi’s sari.
Negative use of the internet that destroys the attention and encourages the spread of adharma.
The idea in American women’s minds that caring for a family is a lesser goal than a career.
The habit of eating out that is weakening the Nabhi of America.
The idea of pursuing a career without also building up the Gruha Lakshmi qualities in a woman.
The despair that blocks the ascent of America’s women and their love for the responsibilities of caring for the home and family.
The negativity in Washington, D.C. preventing auspicious leadership.
The banking and loan systems which impoverish in the name of wealth.
The excessive use of credit cards which began in the United States and has now spread as a bad habit worldwide.
All the aspects of materialism being spread throughout the entire world by the United States.
The fragmentation of America into North, Central, and South. It is one.
The drug-like sleep preventing seekers from becoming like Arjuna.
The deafness of those who turn from the auspicious flute of Lord Krishna.
The negativity preventing Swadeshi in the United States — the popularization of locally made goods.
Malnutrition and obesity problems.
Negativity of false gurus attacking the arts in America.
The residue of false gurus in the brains of the seekers of the Americas.
Problems of black magic in all its forms and vices.
All forces that are against the Nirmala Bhaktas.
Ganesha Puja Talk Synopsis
Cabella Ligure, Italy, September 5, 1998

“I have told you a lot about Him and His nature, but still so many of us have not yet realized what are His powers and what He wants.” To respect Shri Ganesha is to understand the importance of chastity, not only for women, but more for men. “If you have self-respect, in the real sense of the word, you will take to chastity without any difficulties. But if you have no self-respect, then you run after something which is very low, of a very degrading quality…. This habit of not observing the proper protocol of the chastity develops from childhood and we have to be very careful when we are in a Ganesha state.”

“In the whole world there is a crisis of chastity. In the West, especially, we have heard of so many cases of child abuse. In a Temple of God one should not even take the name of this dirty disease which has grabbed the people.” Sahaja Yogis should look after their chastity. “It is not necessary to find a girl for yourself, or a boy for yourself. It is also against the rules of chastity. I am not saying that you should allow your parents to decide, but let the Sahaja Yoga decide, because you are Sahaja Yogis. You are born after the image of Ganesha who ultimately becomes Christ…. The most important thing that if we get ruined on our chastity level then Sahaja Yoga is very, very difficult and it doesn’t give you that blessing as you should have.”

The Romanian and Ukrainian singers sang so beautifully because they are very humble people — they have given up nonsensical ideas about sex life. In Islam, Mohammed Sahib said you can have five wives to prevent women from becoming prostitutes. Once chastity starts leaving us, we can do anything under the sun. Many highly placed people think that they can overcome the binding of Jesus Christ. They think they can go on misbehaving with women who are under them. “They may do it secretly… but Ganesha watches them, and He punishes them.” In all the Christian nations people have wandering eyes which cannot be representative of the chastity of Christ. Sahaja Yogis have to steady their eyes.

“The second point is that the power of Ganesha can only be manifested if you are wise…. Intelligence, so called, is not wisdom. It can give you a very cunning, very aggressive, and sometimes very subtle person, who can go on deceiving people, telling lies, doing all kinds of things, and believing in themselves that they are very successful. Success is never the criteria of a Sahaja Yogi. Success in Sahaja Yoga means very subtle surrendering of oneself to Sahaja Yoga. That is seldom to be found unless and until you meditate every day…. Those who do not meditate will be lost to Sahaja Yoga because wisdom can only grow through your inner inspiration. You can have this inner inspiration only if the power of Shri Ganesha manifests.” He is the giver of wisdom. In wisdom you find solutions that are peaceful, satisfying, and true.

“He is the one who sets you to task also.” Yesterday many people had to suffer a little bit because of the wind that came and blew off your tents. “There is no need to have tents in this climate… but they cannot live without a tent. I can sleep outside very nicely…. So there is no need to sort of fuss about all these things and bring the whole household here…. If you want to have a very comfortable life, and you can’t suffer any discomfort, you are no good for Sahaja Yoga.” One should not try to make oneself a very lordly person.

What you have to do is not to practise asceticism but to become an acetic from within. Then you don’t bother about little things. But our style is still moulded by the outside world. “Once you start going with the fashion then the wisdom disappears…. Wisdom will teach you how to regulate yourself, because you have come here to ascend, to achieve a very special place in the realm of spirituality…. Before doing anything you should just appeal to your wisdom and find out if it is wise to be like that.” With this reference you will reduce your temper, lust, and guilt “because once you start understanding that there is no wisdom in feeling guilty, your guilt will disappear.”

We have a great desire to have things, and to indulge into all kinds of greed. “This greed becomes zero as soon as you understand wisely that there is no need.” Otherwise all the time you will be thinking about yourself, your health, your children, your house — whatever is supposed to be yours. “But death proves that nothing belongs to you. You have come alone and you will have to go alone.” You cannot practise or force this wisdom; it’s to be imbibed through your spirituality. Then you feel the joy of the dancing of Shri Ganesha — like a child. A little child is born within you, a small child who knows how to share.

You become a Gana. Shri Ganesha’s army are Ganas. “They are very powerful and they do all the work of the world. They live in this world, but all their source of energy is from the divine. So Shri Ganesha is an Omkara. He is the first created deity by the Goddess, because He is auspiciousness… created for our good. We are auspicious because of Shri Ganesha.” Some people are always creating problems, out of nothing. “They are not auspicious people. Those who are peacemakers, those who are loving are the ones who are blessed by Shri Ganesha. What is the wisdom in fighting? If you have a fighting nature that means that Ganesha is against you, the power of Ganesha is not with you.”

All those great people who have been respected for centuries have been very wise people — not hot-tempered, not quarrelsome, without lust. You Sahaja Yogis are here on this earth to emancipate the whole of humanity. The aim of your life is to go deep into your spirituality. You all know this, but you do not work out. “Your attention has to be inside, not outside, and you should not react.” Someone who is sensible only as far as his own comforts, money or health are concerned is not a wise person. A little child will always find out what others need — not to gain any favour, or to show off, but in the real sense of the word. That gives him joy. That is collective.

“Today I am going to tell you something more about this collective nature that comes to you through Shri Ganesha’s efforts, or you can say, His powers.” Einstein had a theory that if you all become cool — that is, under Shri Ganesha’s blessing — then we all become one. A Sahaja Yogi also established that when you cool down helium gas, all the atoms start moving in a collective way. Otherwise they are hitting against each other. When we have Shri Ganesha’s blessing within us, in the real sense of the word, then we become very much evolved Sahaja Yogis.” Evolved means we have become one — we all live for each other. We enjoy each other and see to the comfort of each other. “In Sanskrit it is called Ekakharika…. Most of your leaders, I have chosen, are very wise, who avoid problems, who do not get into violence… and when even you people try to destroy Sahaja Yoga, they know you are doing it.”

“So to find out this Ekakharika, you have to go deep down into yourself, by which you will feel that you are now one.” Sahaja Yogis from one part of the world immediately act to help others in another part of the world. “Making friendships without any ulterior motive, without any gain, is one of the signs of your Ekakharika. Not only that you are satisfied with other Sahaja Yogis, but you want to bring other Sahaja Yogis in…. This is something so nourishing.” But by doing that, one should not develop the ego, create an organization of your own, or try to dominate others. Then again, you go against Shri Ganesha and Christ, who are the same. “There is complete Ekakharika between them…. We too develop that special quality of Ekakharika. We forget about so-called religions that we have.”

Everyday in the newspapers you hear about dishonest leaders fighting among themselves. “They are a little bit successful but not for a long time because they will be exposed.” How can a religion be superior to another one which is created by the effort of Shri Ganesha’s auspiciousness? It is not auspicious at all that you fight another religion or another creed or say we are a higher race. All these false ideas drop out because they have created problems. “Shri Ganesha is the one who gives you the wisdom to understand that nobody is superior to another person. You are all made by God and whatever is made by God is auspicious and beautiful.” Once you start understanding that, this Ekakharika spreads outside us to other people. You feel it from inside.

“This Ekakharika first must work in the family.” A family which is disturbed all the time cannot create children who are in the state of Ekakharika. “In the family if they are fighting they cannot be Sahaja Yogis. If there is such a fight it is better to get out of such a family. So we have sanctioned also a divorce. Any man who is flirting with other women or doing wrong things, we have asked him to get out of Sahaja Yoga. The reason is, one bad apple can spoil many apples…. Your family relationships should be absolutely perfect.” If you can’t enjoy the company of your wife or the bliss of family life, you cannot enjoy anything else. “This very close relationship of husband and wife is thrown apart because of Ganesha problem only. If the Ganesha was alright there would have been a perfect union, perfect understanding between husband and wife…. Try to correct your own Shri Ganesha than see to others.” You have to sit on the ground and meditate on Shri Ganesha.

“Now when we run away from the Mother Earth and we don’t touch her, we don’t respect her, in a way we don’t respect Shri Ganesha. He was made out of the Mother Earth, and He controls the Mother Earth. He controls all the five elements. Not only that, but He controls you.”

Ganesha is always there to tell you not to do something wrong. But if you do it then you develop all kinds of horrible diseases, family problems, and national problems. If the children cannot be respected, how can you understand the value of Shri Ganesha? See how sweetly they behave. Even newborn children understand Me. The feeling of understanding love is innately within them.

To understand love is very difficult for egotistical people because they love themselves, or if they love somebody it is out of lust or greed. “But love for love’s sake is only possible if your Shri Ganesha is properly cleaned out and kept. We have come so far, and we have so many Sahaja Yogis all over the world. Of course, I have worked very hard, I must say, but you people have supported Me very much. I am thankful to you. It is not possible, in the Western world especially, where there is no consideration of Ganesha’s principle, that you people should come out so well and accept Sahaja Yoga as a life for yourself.”

“In Sahaja Yoga the most important thing is to worship Shri Ganesha within you and the quality of Shri Ganesha within you. It is very soothing, it is very peace-giving, it is very secure — a security-creating power.” If your Ganesha is alright nobody can touch you, destroy you or upset you. “The world peace is disturbed because we have not worshipped Shri Ganesha.” People may be in very big positions, but they are not in charge of themselves. Their Ganesha is absolutely ruined and finished. Though they may act inauspiciously and secretly, “somehow it will all be exposed because Satya Yuga has come. In this new Yuga there’s light of the truth within us, and this truth can expose all that is nonsensical we have been into.”

Shri Ganesha is the one who is giving us truth. In our brain it comes to us through Jesus Christ. But the behaviour of people who are supposed to be following them is not in their image, which is very spiritual. “You cannot get joy out of anything else but spirituality. You can get some satisfaction, you can get some ego, you might feel that you are something great, but the only way you can get the inner peace and joy is Shri Ganesha’s manifestation in the chakras.”

“I yesterday knew that Shri Ganesha has gone off a little bit…. There must be some people within us who do not follow the principle of Shri Ganesha, and that is why these troubles are there. So with a sincere heart and a sincere mind, if you ask the blessings of Shri Ganesha He is always ready to give. But if you don’t listen to him, and if you destroy your chastity in any way, He will punish you…. He doesn’t have the idea of sparing. At the level of Christ, only, He thought of forgiving. But forgiving doesn’t mean that any sin can be forgiven. It’s a kind of controlling power. Christ has said that you’ll be forgiven, but Shri Ganesha, at a point, when He sees people are forgiven, He tries to punish you. That’s the limiting point where He thinks it’s not proper to forgive such and such a person.” Christ may want to forgive but we don’t know if Shri Ganesha will allow it to that extent. And Christ accepts that because they are the same.

“So we cannot depend too much on the forgiveness power of Christ because there is Ganesha who is sitting there and He has in His hands a very powerful weapon.”

Shri Ganesha is peace and coolness. He gives you coolness after realization. “It is Paramachaitanya, no doubt, but the one who emits it is Shri Ganesha.” He brings you down to a very cool satisfied person who has complete calmness. With that calmness you become all one. This Ekakharika starts. Oneness is established. Whatever country you may be living in, whatever country you may be proud of, you will see the bad things in that country and you will try to improve that. You will not be identified with the bad things.”

This Satya Yuga exposes, and you do not support something that is wrong, which is being done as an aggression. “Once you don’t accept that, then you start becoming one with the people who are one with you.” They all believe in the same thing — their ideas, their thinking, their joy is the same, and they enjoy each other very much…. This oneness has to be established fully in Sahaja Yoga.”

People who are only interested in making money, finding a wife or husband, or things of a low level do not achieve this oneness. Shri Ganesha showed His humility by circling His Mother to go around the world, travelling on a rat. This shows that speed is not the way of Sahaj. You have to slow down your speed. Also you have to love and respect your Mother, and know that She is the highest, the greatest. “That is how He has been expressed within ourselves. Once that happens, your spirituality grows.”

“I hope you will work it out this way now — Shri Ganesha, and start the Ekakharika. I don’t like people writing letters against their leaders, against this man and that man. That is not good. There is no need. If you just can be forgiving and keeping one with each other.” Try to get more and more people. “You cannot separate anyone and say that they are condemned because they are no good. Try to get them with your forgiveness. With your sense of chastity, you should forgive them. So these extremities should also be given up. This perhaps comes from a kind of sense of insecurity.” Don’t get frightened or upset with them. Try to manage them and look after them.

“I hope you will all meditate now after this to develop your Ganesha qualities and to develop that power of chastity, and also of peace and security. May God bless you.”

News from Around the World
India: Unity International Foundation Award
Shri Mataji is to be presented with the “Unity Award for International Understanding” in Delhi on 17th December, 1998. This is their highest award. So far this award has been given to seven persons who happen to be heads of a state or country. Shri Mataji is the first person selected by them who is not head of any government or of any country. The following is a profile of the award and its history.

Any organization can take pride in reaching the 30th milestone of its career. Unity International foundation (UIF) has achieved that goal. Devoted and dedicated to the twin ideals of “One World Family,” UIF has been working ceaselessly to promote understanding and goodwill among the people of different hues and origins, irrespective of their diverse ideologies and political affiliations and thus building bridges to span the chasm of differences.

Having inspiration from two great protagonists of secularism and international fraternity, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and President Zakir Hussein and later nurtured by President Zail Singh, UIF was established in the mid-sixties. It has come a long way to get recognition at home and abroad.

Recently, UIF has launched a parliamentary group, under the chairmanship of Mr. V. Narayanasamy, M.P., enrolling more than 50 M.P.s from different political parties.

UIF regularly organizes seminars, symposia and round table discussions on topics of international importance, exhibits art shows, screens award-winning foreign films, and holds receptions in honour of visiting heads of state and other high dignitaries. It also felicitates distinguished Indian leaders. UIF in the recent past has had the proud privilege of receiving the Vice President of India, the Foreign Minister and the President of The Indian Council for Cultural Relations.

From time to time, UIF exchanges delegations with foreign countries. Its delegations have visited Argentina, Bhutan, Cambodia, China, Hungary, Hong Kong, Iraq, Italy, Kazakhstan, Mauritius, Nepal, Russia, Switzerland, Thailand, Ukraine, United Kingdom, and Uzbekistan.

UIF also confers Unity Awards on internationally renowned personalities. Among the past recipients are the late Swedish Premier Olaf Palme; the Late Governor-General of Mauritius, Seewoosagur Ramgoolam; and the President of Argentina (1983-87), Raul Alfonsin.

UIF also gives away prizes to those distinguished people who have been richly contributing to human civilization through their respective professions and vocations. Among the recipients are a Japanese medical scientist, a Norwegian peace crusader, an Austrian human rights activist, a Hungarian painter, a member of the British House of Lords, a Russian media man and the Chinese People’s Association for Friendship with Foreign Countries.

In 1993, UIF instituted the “Ambassador of the Year Award.” The first two recipients are the envoys from Argentina and China. A monthly journal which is the organization’s namesake — Unity International — is also being brought out by the organization.

Israel: A Divine Miracle!
A new dimension of spirituality has been set in motion on the holy land of Israel. Under the auspicious attention of our Divine Mother, yogis from Israel and other parts of the world spent three full days enlightening the thirsty seekers of this land blessed with great prophets and the divine incarnation of Lord Jesus Christ.

The scene of action was in one of Israel’s biggest fairs on alternative living where Sahaja Yoga had a stand. A group of 13 yogis did the divine work of giving non-stop self-realization. The innocent people of Israel waited patiently in four rows to get their self-realization, each of them asking if it would be possible somehow for them to relax, become peaceful, free from stress, and stop thinking. In only a few minutes they found out that it was so simple and Sahaj. Even the Sahaja Yogis found that it was very simple to give self-realization, probably due to the deep seeking of the people and the divine attention of Shri Mataji. Approximately 300-400 people got realization each day. Due to time constraints we just gave self-realization and requested the people to come to the follow-up program to learn about Sahaja Yoga. To our complete surprise more than 90 seekers are now attending the follow-up programs.

Some of us had very interesting experiences at the fair. One man explained after his realization that he experienced a cool spiral of wind moving up his spine in a clockwise direction. Another person asked a yogi if he could help him to come out of his depression. He had just finished measured his bio-feedback at another stand at the same fair, with a very negative result. The yogi very lovingly assured him that Sahaja Yoga has helped many to come out of their depressions. This person was so surprised with his own transformation shortly after his realization that he thanked the yogi and again went back to the bio-feedback stand to see if there was a significant change in his state. The result was five points positive over a normal human being. There were many others who just felt completely relaxed and peaceful after their realization.

Later on during a beautiful journey around the country we had more opportunities to give realization on our way. The turning point of the Israel tour was the two-day seminar on the Lake of Galilee, where once Lord Christ walked over the water. At the end of the seminar we had a havan, which was very clearing and powerful.

Later on we learned that the peace agreement in Israel was signed shortly after we finished our seminar.

Postscript: The fair brought a lot of people and interest to Sahaj. In Tel Aviv, after the fourth meeting we still have about 50 to 60 people. There are some good reactions and some sincere interest. In Haifa, there are still about 20 people and we also just started in Jerusalem.

— Shantanu Chatterjee, Austria

Australia: Sahaja Asthma Research Yields Remarkable Results
Three Year Study of Sahaja Yoga to Follow

The asthma research program in Australia continues, with some remarkable results emerging. Here is the story of one patient who has finished his 16-week program of Sahaja Yoga treatments and has been assessed.

At the beginning of the program his asthma was so severe that he was unable to do many of the lung function tests at all. The basic tests that he did do indicated that he was of the very worst category. Even room air alone would trigger an asthma attack if he breathed too hard!

At the Sahaja Yoga program he took to meditation like a fish to water. At the end of the 16 sessions we assessed him. To our surprise, he now used almost no medication whatsoever! His asthma was so much better that not only had his lung function almost doubled, but there was no trace of asthma in his system.

There are a number of patients of the trial who have experienced other positive substantial changes. As a result of the asthma research, the Australian Sahaj doctors have been granted permission to conduct a three year, multi-faceted research program on Sahaja Yoga.

The plan is to conduct a number of clinical trials, as well as specialized studies such as blood-borne biochemical markers, heart rate, blood pressure, brain-mapping, etc. The bulk of this research will be funded by the university and associated hospitals.

Our first project will probably be a trial of Sahaja Yoga in the treatment of about one hundred sufferers of chronic headache. This will be conducted under the auspices of the University of New South Wales and the Australian Institute of Neurological Sciences.

The tremendous progress that is being made in these fields will become powerful support for the progress of Sahaja Yoga.

— Sydney, Australia

Mexico: Sahaja Yoga Medical Conference in Mexico City
With the blessings of our Holy Mother, the Sahaja Yoga medical conference from September 2-4 was a joyful event, with the important participation of Sahaja medical doctors from three continents. Before the Conference we had a havan at Cuernavaca, a city to the south of Mexico City, and Ganesha Puja was held after the Conference.

On September 2, the Faculty of Medicine of the National University of Mexico (UNAM) received Prof. Dr. U.C. Rai for a conference on the “Role of Sahaja Meditation in Medicine.” Medical doctors, academicians, university students and researchers attended this medical conference, presided by Dr. Carlos Viesca, Chief of the Department of History of Medicine of the Faculty, Dr. Graciela de la Lama, former Ambassador of Mexico to India and Director of the House of India in Mexico, and Dra. Graciela Vazquez-Diaz J., Co-Chairman of the Conference.

Participants were in total silence for more than an hour, looking at the graphics of medical case studies, and hearing his explanations on how diseases have been diminished or cured by Sahaja Yoga. Prof. Rai told the delegates that high blood pressure, bronchial asthma, epilepsy, migraine, and a host of other psychosomatic diseases for which there is no cure in modern medicine now can be cured at the International Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre. This centre, located in New Mumbai, India, was founded by Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in 1996. This Centre is unique in the whole world, where no medicines are given and treatment to patients from all over the world is done only by vibrations.

After the conference finished, medical doctors, researchers and students came to the podium to congratulate him and to talk on the possibility of joint projects on different areas of interest, and asked to know more on his research.

After hearing what Prof. Rai explained about Sahaja Yoga, Dr. Viesca explained how Mexican Indians believed in working on four centres of energy in the body to cure illnesses. The exchange of experiences aroused the possibility of presenting more exchanges of experiences in the near future which could be the basis for a joint project with India or other countries with the same interest.

On September 3, Dr. Rai gave a second public conference at the District of Coyoacan, to the south of Mexico City. The audience responded with great interest, asking him numerous questions. When one person asked for the experience of awakening the Kundalini, Dr. Rai finished to explain the substantive aspects of Sahaja Yoga and how its founder and master, Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi has spread it in more than 70 countries. After Dr. Rai gave the Realization, everyone raised their hands to show that they had felt the cool breeze over their heads, and were invited to a follow-up program for the following week.

On Friday, September 4, Dr. Rai addressed the Mexican Sahaja collective, supported by Sahaja medical doctors who had come to the Medical Conference. Edgar Patarroyo from Colombia demonstrated his great capacity to interpret the two conferences into Spanish, and directed the Sahaja cleansing techniques during the workshop. Other Sahaja doctors in attendance were Henry Forero, also from Colombia, Pepe Suero from Spain, and Chanda his wife who is a medical doctor from India.

The TV channel PCTV, that transmits to an audience of a million people in Mexico and Latin America, inaugurated a new program called “New Horizons for the Millenium”, with a special program on Sahaja Yoga. They interviewed Dr. Rai, the other Sahaja medical doctors, and the Sahaja representative in Mexico.

The Sahaja Medical Conference in Mexico has opened a new chapter for the treatment of psychosomatic diseases between the Faculty of Medicine of the National University of Mexico and the International Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre. It has also awakened great interest in the general public on the philosophy and practice of Sahaja Yoga.

May our Holy Mother continue blessing Sahaja Yoga in Mexico, and favour this small collective with established yogis from other countries.

— Graciela Vazquez-Diaz, Mexico City

USA: Sahaja Yoga Medical Conference at NIH in Washington, D.C.
For the first time, the value of Sahaja Yoga has been recognized by a major scientific institution in the United States in an historic event. On September 9, 1998, the prestigious National Institutes of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Maryland (a suburb of Washington, D.C.) was the site of a day-long medical conference on Sahaja Yoga. The internationally-renowned medical physiologist and Sahaja Yogi, Prof. Dr. U. C. Rai presented the findings of 12 years of research into the physiological effects and medical benefits of Sahaja Yoga.

During the conference, Dr. Rai showed a video recording of interviews with patients from the USA, UK, Mexico, Germany, Brazil, Russia and India who were treated at the health centre and were healed. NIH host Dr. George Patrick, Ph.D., Chief of Recreational and Rehabilitation Therapy, thanked Dr. Rai for his excellent presentation and explained why Sahaja Yoga, besides tackling health problems from stress to cardiovascular disease, was important to the work of the research giant. Calling Sahaja Yoga “complementary medicine,” Dr. Patrick spoke of the NIH’s understanding of the necessity to continue studying the mind-body effect in healing and to introduce effective new methods. “NIH believes in energy medicine and complementary medicines and sees the powerful role of spirituality in the healing process,” he said. “Sometimes healing doesn’t necessarily mean a cure, but it does mean making people whole. Sahaja Yoga helps that process along and we like what we see,” he concluded.

A report about the conference aired on a local cable news program that night. The five-minute piece was the second story of the evening, and showed Sahaja Yoga in a positive light. The journalist interviewed several members of the audience, including some who had been treated at the Centre. The journalist even got her realization during the conference.

Despite his busy schedule, Dr. Rai gave the Sahaja Yogis many opportunities to meet with him and benefit from his knowledge and experience. Shortly after he arrived in Washington, DC from the medical conference in Mexico City, he gave a talk to the yogis who had gathered for the Ganesha Puja seminar in nearby Maryland. (This talk will be reported in the next issue.) The atmosphere was charged with excitement. As we anticipated the upcoming NIH conference, the yogis could feel that we were part of history in the making.

The next day, he graciously agreed to two 20-minute videotaped interviews about his work at the Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre. These interviews will be edited and made available for programs, cable TV and radio projects. Later, in New York, Dr. Rai gave another question-and-answer session on medicine and Sahaja Yoga. Throughout his stay, he was gracious, generous and eager to do what he could to assist the growth of Sahaja Yoga in America.

— Mary Yelesin, USA

Copyright © 2026 Nirmala Vidya Amruta. All Rights Reserved. Privacy | Terms of Use | Amruta is supported by the WordPress Multilingual Plugin. | oska.dev
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
About WordPress
Nirmala Vidya Amruta
Hi, Prashant handge
Search