SOURCE: https://www.amruta.org/2001/08/02/start-sahaja-yoga-in-jail/
DATE: 2001-08-02
LOCATION/EVENT: Empire State Plaza, New York, United States — Public Program
SAVED: 2026-05-16
NOTE: Transcript (English) – Draft. Not fully verified.
KEY FACTS: Mayor Kenneth G. Cranna proclaimed August 3 2001 "Shri Mataji Day" in City of Hudson. Shri Mataji mentioned Belapur International Medical Research Center and Clinic in Bombay. Sahaja Yoga in Tihar Jail mentioned. 92 countries. Benin 20,000 Sahaja Yogis. Twice nominated Nobel Peace Prize. Guest speaker Women's Conference Beijing 1995. Personality of Year 1986 Italian Government. US Congress recognition 1997 and 2000.
---

2 August 2001
Public Program
Empire State Plaza, New York (United States)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
[Starts at 12:10]
Sahaja Yogini: This is the moment that we have all been waiting for, and before Shri Mataji blesses us with her talk, we want to officially greet Shri Mataji from the members of government here. So, Shri Mataji, the first message is from Governor Pataki. And Governor Pataki says, "Dear friend, it is a pleasure to send greetings to all and to welcome doctor Srivastava to Albany, the capital of the Empire State.
As [Unclear] our communities represent various cultures. New York State is a venue for events that bring people together for common [unclear] mankind and teach positive lessons of world peace and harmony. 13:00
Through our understanding of various cultures, a greater level of global cooperation and friendly accord among all people can be achieved. It is with a sense of appreciation for those who are co-building a better world, that many people come together for a such an event such as this.
Best wishes for a successful and meaningful gathering.
Ever truly yours,
George E. Pataki, Governor".
[Applause]

We also have with us a mayor from the city of Hudson, Mayor Cranna, who has a presentation for you, Shri Mataji. Mayor Cranna.
[Applause]

Mayor Cranna: It certainly is a pleasure and an honour to be here. When I looked out, in this room before, I realized I had taken my bar exam here, I must admit I feel much more enlightened tonight. Whereas Shri Mataji was born in 1923 in Chindwara, India, and as the youth worked closely with Mahatma Gandhi in the India's struggle for independence, and whereas Shri Mataji founded the Belapur International Medical Research Center and Clinic in Bombay, India, whereas Sri Mataji formed the Theatre of Eternal Values, whereas Shri Mataji created the Sahaja Yoga Charitable Shelter in Delhi, India to provide shelter and comfort to the homeless, and whereas Sri Mataji founded the Sahaja Yoga International. Now therefore, I, Kenneth G. Cranna, Mayor of the City of Hudson, do hereby recognize the innumerable contributions and efforts that Shri Mataji has made to countless people, and wish to extend my sincere appreciation for your continuing commitment towards world peace and to proclaim tomorrow, August 3rd, the year 2001 in the City of Hudson, Shri Mataji Day.
[Applause]

[Cut in the video]

Debbie: Shri Mataji, from Kevin Cahill, who is a member of the Assembly, and there is a citation which is the last one, and it is from John McEnany, and he is again is,
"Whereas it is fitting that the Assembly representatives who comprise the People's House of the Empire State recognize and acknowledge the good work of distinguished visitors to New York who contribute so much to the cause of peace and justice, and whereas individuals who give of their time and energies and serve the best interests of their fellow man are an asset beyond remuneration, and cannot be sufficiently extolled, and whereas Dr. Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi has given not only of her time and energies, but also shares her joy, deep spiritual insight and inspiration through a method of Self-realization she created over 30 years ago, known as Sahaja Yoga, and whereas her tireless work for humanity and her impact on the spiritual evolution of mankind has earned her global recognition as a celebrated author, as well as an honour of being twice nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize, whereas Shri Mataji has been further distinguished as a guest speaker at the Women's Conference in Beijing, China in 1995, and has been declared Personality of the Year in 1986 by the Italian Government, and has received recognition from the United States Congress in both 1997 and the year 2000, and whereas this committed woman has selflessly dedicated herself to her spiritual mission, bringing self-realization to her followers, and has always given of herself unstintingly.
Now, therefore, be it resolved that as a duly elected member of the Assembly of the State of New York, on behalf of the speaker and the entire Assembly, I send greetings and pay tribute to Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, as she promotes her message of health of mind, body, among the family of man, and the practitioners of Sahaja Yoga here, in the capital area of the great state of New York,
John J. McInerney".
[Applause]

Shri Mataji: I bow. All the seekers of truth. At the very outset, I thank the mayor of Albany and also the mayor of Hudson for recognizing the work of Sahaja Yoga. I think America is a country where all talents are recognized and are absorbed. It's a very unique country, I must say, where people understand the value of spirituality.

It's a very difficult thing to work about spirituality because it is such a hidden power within us that we don't know what we have, and if somebody wants to tell you about it, people start guessing whether it is true or not. As you see in this world, though we have progressed so many years, I used to always admire Abraham Lincoln very much, I find still so many of us are lost in the search of truth. Even those who take to drugs or take to wrong type of things are mostly seeking the truth about themselves. What is the solution of this calamity we are facing in the whole world of big fights and wars, all sorts of killings?

The reason is we do not know ourselves, what we are. First thing, is we have to know ourselves. When you know yourself, you'll understand which is the right path, which is the right way to go. There have been many great changes before, even in China, even in Japan, of course in India, also in your country. But perhaps it was difficult for them to convince that all of us can achieve that state of spirituality.

I'm not doing any new work as such, but it's only new in one way, that it gives you Self-realization. To all of you it gives you that knowledge about yourself, and such unity is expressed with that that you'll be amazed, we are having no problem of all these nonsensical things we do all over, of destruction, of hatred.

Within us is the Spirit, it is in our heart, the Spirit, the science. And it's the reflection of God Almighty. We do not know what we are. That's why we do not know also how spiritually we are endowed. We are endowed with it. It is within us and it's very easy in these modern times to become spiritual. We have all kinds of intelligence, as you know. People talk of intelligence, IQs and then there is also emotional IQs. But spiritual IQs, people don't understand. That's only possible if you become the Spirit. Now for that the God Almighty who is our Creator has already made arrangements. It's not that I have to make any arrangement, or you have to do anything about it.

Within us in the triangular bone, as they must have told you, resides the power, when it is awakened, it passes through six centres and connects you to the Divine Power, the All-pervading Divine Power, which in the Koran called 'Ruh' and in Tao is called as Tao. All these religions have described about this Power that is around us and does all, all the work. Everything is created by it. It is looked after. It is absolutely a perfect system that is being created. But in our imperfection, we don't understand it. But when this power which is in the triangular bone rises, it pierces through six centres as they have been shown here. The seventh one is below, below the Kundalini, which guards and looks after and protects the Kundalini. That is our innocence. Not that you have to be innocent; even if you are not innocent, even if you have been a criminal, even you have had horrible diseases with you, still this Kundalini when she does this in her ascent, what she does is to enlighten all these centres of the parasympathetic. It enlightens and purifies those centres.
And once it pierces through the fontanel bone area, it is actualization of your baptism. It's a happening. Baptism is not a ritual, but it is a reality which should work out, and you can feel it on top of your head, the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost and also on your hands.

You'll be amazed even Mohammed Sahib has said that, "When your resurrection will come, that time your hands will speak out". How can hands speak? It's through the cool breeze that they receive on the fingertips. It's nothing mysterious. It's nothing difficult. But what one has to do is to understand that we are all capable of getting it, and we are all capable of enjoying that life which we call as 'Sahaj'. 'Sahaj' means spontaneous. 'Saha' means with, 'ja' means born. It is born with you. This Kundalini is born with you and you have a fundamental right to become a Self-realised person.

As a result of that as I told you, it enlightens all the centres which are responsible for our physical, mental, emotional and spiritual being. And once it is awakened, physically you can be cured. It's true with Sahaja Yoga, cancer has been cured, it's a fact. And for that you don't have to pay. It's in your own, your own power which cures it. If you know how to raise this, you can cure yourself, then you can cure others also. If you know what's wrong with your centres, and if you know how to correct them, you can do this to others.

As they say there are Sahaja Yogis in 92 countries. I didn't go to all these countries, I cannot go. But what has happened is that, those who got their Realization, those who understood it, went down there, have given Realization to many. A country like Benin, we have 20,000 Sahaja Yogis. Ivory Coast we have lots of Sahaja Yogis. And this is what has happened is that, they got it through some Sahaja Yogi who went there. So when you get it, you can give it to others. You can make out what's the matter of another person on your fingertips. It sounds very strange but it is so. On your fingertips, you will know what's wrong with the other person, what's wrong with you and if you know how to correct it, you can correct yourself. You can get rid of any diseases, anything that you want to. But firstly, what goes out of you are our six enemies.

The first enemy that we have is anger. Then we have this lust which is boundless, which has no limitations, and which can make you a person living in Hell with that. So the balance is trapped on that. Then we have jealousies. It's a very common thing which one will do. Jealousies are there; it's so stupid, but it is the truth.

Then we have also another enemy which we call as attachment to things. We are attached to our family, attached to ourselves also. And we waste so much energy on that. And when we find that it was a very, very wrong thing to deal or was very superficial, then you are very much caught up.
Then we have a possessive nature. We want to possess the house, we want to possess the wife, possess the children, all kinds of possessiveness which is stupid. What can you possess in this world but yourself? You have to possess your Self. You have to know your Self. And for that you don't have to do anything. You don't have to pay anything. It's a natural process of our evolution.

In the evolutionary process, we have not grown as much as we should have grown. There's something missing in it, and that evolutionary process can be easily manifested through the awakening of this Kundalini. I must say this is not an original idea of mine, because in our country, and in many other countries also, they knew about this. But they were born with that higher type of awareness, and they didn't know how to make others, how to bring this to the notice of others or to give it to them.
All kinds of problems we are facing for nothing at all, because we have got the pure knowledge, we have got the true knowledge. Unless and until we have that true knowledge, we just go on fighting on various nonsensical things, killing each other, destroying everything. But if it happens to you, then you immediately see the real enlightenment within you, and you'll understand what you are supposed to do about yourself and about others.

It's a very remarkable thing, I think, that is happening now all over the world. And it is taking a serious boost in so many countries. Countries which are not even developed so much, countries which are over developed. Everywhere, I was surprised, there are so many seekers, so many seekers of truth, and they just won't listen.

Now what does it give you? First of all, it gives you a complete balance. You are not disturbed easily, you are a peaceful person, absolutely peaceful, enjoying your peace and emitting peace to others.
Then it gives you collective temperament. Then you start seeing that the whole world is your own. You become a global personality. Then you don't think like, "I belong to this place, I belong to that place". No. You all become, sort of, globally bound together. As we have in Sahaja Yoga now, you'll find people from all over the world, who are together. And the way they enjoy each other, is really very, very satisfying and very joyous.

Another greatest thing that you get is love and compassion. Love and compassion which acts, which works. For example, now there are people who are taking drugs in this country. They can be easily cured, easily. Overnight people have been cured from drugs, especially in India. And now they are living a very normal life. They were all intelligent people but lost in that drug.

I have suggested that we could have this center for drug eradication in Canajoharie. But people are afraid of drug addicts. They say that, "Drug addicts, we don't want to have among ourselves, because they'll trouble us". But it's an overnight, I told you, overnight you can get rid of your drugs. So, I thought of another solution. That all these young boys who take drugs, you see, they are put in jail. All their lives, poor things, they are in jail and all their beautiful years of enjoyment are lost in jail. It's such a pitiable condition. So I said, "Why not we start Sahaja Yoga in jail?" In India, in three jails we have got. And one of the most famous, 'Tihar jail', we have got Sahaja Yoga and people have changed and transformed. They are wonderful people. Now we can have that also here, very easily, and we can save these young people from going through the tyranny of jail. If it is possible, I would also request, Mr. Mayor, both of you, that if you can give us a little permission. Of course, we don't charge any money, we don't ask for any help, nothing of the kind. It's absolute charity. We can work in the jail for people, even the criminal simple, even the worst possible murderers, they become nice. This is our experience after all. So, we can solve this problem quite a lot if the authorities allow us to work in the jail for no price or no money.

Now one may say, "How is it so simple? Why is it so easy and why we don't have to pay any money for it?" The reason is, it is a natural process. How much do we pay when we breathe? How much do we pay when we see people? How much do we pay when we can hear? It's a natural process of evolution. And with this new evolution, your awareness becomes collective, your awareness becomes endowed with special powers of which you are not proud. This is the power of love, and Divine love without any return of action. The only return they think is that they could cure somebody, they feel over-happy. And they think it's the most joyous thing they have done in life.

And then the relationship around them is so beautiful. I have never seen them quarrelling, fighting or doing anything that was violent, never. Always enjoying, always in a very great feeling of oneness with everybody else. We have in India in a place called Ganapatipule, seminars, people from all these countries are coming. I have never seen them fighting or quarrelling or putting up a pitch [unclear]. They all the time are one with each other and enjoy the goodness of each other. Because all of them, if they become good, what is the problem?

Thus, you see this new method of awakening of the Kundalini, which I should say, I have done only one thing, that I have found out a method how you can do it collectively. Formerly, you know, a guru would take only one person out of thousands, and may give the Realization. Also, that is the tradition was, that one guru will give, real guru, will give to only one person. But now it's not so. So, collectively you can give Realization to so many people. They may be seekers, may not be seekers. Maybe any kind, they all can get it because this Kundalini is there, in the triangular bone. Can you imagine the Greeks called it sacrum, meaning this sacred bone. Why did they call it? They called it, because it was Kundalini there, they knew. Greeks knew a lot about this, but it so happened unfortunately, that suddenly, the whole thing changed and they had some other kind of spiritual movement. So, the real spiritual movement is where you become the Spirit. And when you'll become the Spirit, you will be amazed at yourself, what you have been missing is there.

In all the religions, the essence is this. Christ has said, "Know thyself". Nobody tries that, "Know thyself". Mohammed Sahib has said the same. Everybody has said the same thing to first, you know yourself. But the question was how? How are we to know? And in that questioning people got lost into different, different type and styles.

There's only one style and that is awakening of the Kundalini and then you will understand the beauty of all the religions, of all the religious leaders, the truth about them. Because thus you know the truth. And what is truth is that you are not this body, you are not this mind, you are not your emotions, but you are the Spirit. That is the truth. And once that which you know, you know about everything. The truth has to be accepted and has to be practiced. Now if I tell you that, "You can cure somebody". You'll never believe it, even if after Realization. You will never believe it that you can cure without any medicine, without things. But you can. Then you have to try. That takes time, you'd better try. When you try on people, you realize that, "Yes, yes, it happens, it works, it works". And when you see that working out, then you have faith in yourself and you start working it on somebody. And you are so full of love and so full of energy, that you want to do it, you want to do it whenever it is possible. Firstly, enjoy yourself, then you enjoy everybody else. And then you enjoy your work of spiritual awakening. This is what has to happen.

There should be the actualization of baptism. It's not just that somebody breaks water, puts on their head, and you've got baptised. You cannot. It has not happened. That's what we are not. So, what is gone wrong is here. But first, you should all get connected to the Divine Power. And once you are connected you should feel them on your fingertips. It's sometimes, one doesn't feel, doesn't matter. Maybe there's some sickness, maybe some problems. But whatever it is, ultimately everybody gets it. Those who desire all, all get it.

[Realisation process and Q&A section follows — see full transcript]

[End of talk]
