SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 2002-07-21
TALK: Nirmala Vidya Amruta
LOCATION/EVENT: of-adi-shakti
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:22:55
CHARS: 84481
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
Post navigation
Previous post:
The Divine Cool Breeze, May-June 2002, Vol. 15, No. 3
Next post:
The Divine Cool Breeze, Sept-Oct 2002, Vol. 15, No. 5
The Divine Cool Breeze, July-Aug 2002, Vol. 15, No. 4
Books online | All Books
Monday, July 1st, 2002
DCB
Magazine
Online, PDF
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English
Google Drive
The Divine Cool Breeze
July – August 2002 volume fifteen number four

I bless you all to do this work, which was left half done by the saints.
It is your duty to complete it.

I can give you the advice and the advice is that you enlarge your heart, you become humble and try to spread Sahaja Yoga with humility, not with aggressiveness. That is extremely important. If you can do that, then you will do full justice to this life, which is a spiritual life. Without that, you cannot achieve, cannot achieve the strength of spirituality. For that, you have to understand that it’s very, very important that you should give Sahaja Yoga a full chance through your wisdom.

The Divine Cool Breeze
The Puja of Adi Shakti
Rising through the right side
The importance of Brahmarandra
The seven chakras
Aggressive people
The aggressive nature
Raising the kundalini
Ascent through the right side chakras
To change others
The right side is missing
The time to do more
Think of others
Why I’m On This Earth
Spirituality is most important
The left and right sides
Diseases on the right
Express your right side
Raja Janaka and Christ
Giving Realization
Advice of the Guru
Muhammed was misunderstood
Day of the Guru
The Guru Principle
So many saints
A different personality
Becoming is important
Divine Movement
Divine Vibrations
Those with medical problems
Those without medical problems
The Mother Kundalini
Monitoring your progress
Routine at the centre
I have come to build temples in the heart of human beings
Globally One
A Little Ripple in the Heart of My Mother
mountain
The Puja of Adi Shakti
And Adi Shakti is the complete personality.

“Today it’s a different day, altogether, for all of you because this is the Puja of Adi Shakti and Adi Shakti is the complete personality. It’s not only the left side that you know.”

On the 23rd of June 2002, about six hundred yogis from all over the world gathered in Cabella to celebrate Adi Shakti Puja. It was one of the hottest weekends that Cabella has had in a long time, with temperatures as high as forty degrees. Shri Mataji arrived at 10:30 pm. Two hundred yogis outside, holding torches of fire to light the path to the hangar, greeted Her. Fireworks were also used. Inside the hall, they were singing bhajans.
— Eronaldo de Souza

This is the biggest calamity that the world is facing today, that those who have achieved great heights are least bothered as to what good has to be done.

Rising through the right side
“You all know only the left side, from Shri Ganesha through the ascent of different, different chakras on the left side. I didn’t want to tell you about the right side to begin with because those who have gone through the right side got just lost.

“They got the Gayatri mantra from the writings, but they didn’t know what it was about.” They moved on the right side and ended up at the Agyna, trying to get Self Realization. “They were promised that if you do this right side properly, you will reach to the ultimate goal of Self Realization, but none of them reached it.” Most of them got into terrible tempers, cursing and destroying others, which they learned through their right side movement. “There was no Kundalini Awakening.” At most, they got to the Agyna chakra “and then they collapsed into different places of complete ignorance.

“All these books were written without understanding that it’s not easy to go via the right side, but best was to awaken your kundalini. The kundalini directly takes you up in the centre of all the chakras, up to the Agnya and crosses Agnya and goes beyond Agnya into the Sahasrara. And then it pierces through the Sahasrara.”

The Gayatri Mantra

Aum Bhuvah, Aum Swah.
Aum Mah, Aum Janah,
Aum Tapah, Aum Satyam.
Aum Tatsavitruvarenyam
Bhargo Devasya Dhi Mahi.
Dhiyoyonah Prachodayat,
Aum Apo Jyotirasomritam.
Brahma Bhoor
Bhuvah Swarom.

The importance of Brahmarandra
I never told you about the importance of the Brahmarandra, from where it pierces, but now, “for most of you, the time has come.” In childhood, the fontanelle bone area always pulsates “because the spirit entered through that area and, when you close it, it settles in the Heart.

“Now you have to become the spirit-orientated person, but how to enter into the Sahasrara was the problem.” The tantricas, who reached Sahasrara, did so through the left side.

“So the right-sided became extremely hot-tempered … ambitious, ferocious and they started killing people on the basis of cursing. They’re very good at cursing people, to be always forward, push back all the people and over-ride everybody’s rights. They were regarded as the most ambitious and most powerful people.

“Now the brahmins and, to some extent, the shatriyas, they then took the right side. Because of the right side, they became very powerful…. They were regarded as extremely powerful and majestic people, but they were not because they’re so hot-tempered. Hot-tempered people cannot be spiritual.”

The seven chakras
“So they were told, ‘You’ll get your spirituality. Don’t worry. Keep moving.’ And the seven chakras were described on the right side.

“According to them, there is bhooh, bhuvah…. Bhuvah is the complete cosmos or we can call it antariksh….

“Swahah is consumption at the Nabhi chakra” and swadhah is the consumption inside, the absorption.

“Then is the minya – heart, mana….
“The Vishuddhi is janah, collectivity, people, go to the people – janah.
“Then, at the Agnya, it is tapah. In tapah we have Christ in the centre. Left side, they had Jainism. Right side, Christianity.” They were not actually on the ascending path. “They were just side outlets … for the energy of people who were trying to seek the truth.

“Now this happened for ages in India. All the gurus, all the sadhus, all the big tapasis, all of them did this, but where did they reach? Tapasis were the people who could give curses…. With the glance of the eye, they could kill somebody, they could burn something.”

With all these right-sided powers, they reached hell or limbo. “Nobody got Self Realization.”

Aggressive people
There followed all kinds of aggressive people – Greeks, Egyptians, English, Germans, Catholics, Romans. “All of them were aggressive and were taking the land and property of other countries…. They believed in the killing of the people….

“So how to bring them to the normal, to the central path? One side was, as I told you, bhooh bhur, swahah swadhah – is consumption. This was done by the Guru Principle. Then we have mana, janah. That is collective. They became collective, no doubt, because they’re so powerful that they had such a lot of people with them…. With their oppressive temperament, they were fighting on people and were oppressing them….

“Wars were created. Then so many people were killed. We had Hitler as the maximum of cruelty. They never cared for humanity. Then ultimately it came to the Agnya.” At the Agnya, they killed Jesus Christ. “They destroyed so many great saints who were really sent through the central path. Some were incarnations and they destroyed them. All this happened since the time of Rama…..

“One after another, so many rakshasas came and they destroyed the peaceful culture of the world.” They were extremely arrogant show-offs and very aggressive people. “This aggression came with such a great force and followed one after another. It went up to a point when people reacted, they were killed and were destroyed. So horrible people were created.”

The aggressive nature
This aggressive and destructive nature is still within us. It is within some people because they are right-sided. “All right-side people had this problem – temper, aggression, controlling others. The growth stopped and there was no spiritual growth. They wanted to have spirituality, but with this kind of behaviour they had developed, spirituality ran away.

“We had so many incarnations. They all were killed, crucified or were finished. There was no possibility of saving human beings in general.” Hitler came and ruined the whole world. “All this is because we have taken to right-sided movement, which they thought was easier for spirituality, which it was not.

“So they crossed all the limits and they reached a stage that they became absolutely devils, rakshasas.” Even their gurus were rakshasas. “All the incarnations were tortured by them…. How they saved themselves is remarkable, but ultimately, they couldn’t produce any results.”

They destroyed so many great saints who were really sent through the central path.

Raising the kundalini
“So the first thing I tried was to study about the kundalini, that I should be able to raise the kundalini and I knew I had come for that, not for anything else…. I told you the knowledge of the left side, plus raising your kundalini. By raising your kundalini, you broke your Sahasrara and you entered into the realm of real joy, of reality. All these bad qualities started falling out. In the central path, first the Mooladhara came. By the awakening of the Mooladhara in the central path, you became very pure people. Your eyes became pure. Your licentiousness went away. Your cheapness went away.” You became very holy people.

“Unless and until that happens, you cannot be in Sahaj Yog. You cannot be a licentious, you cannot be a flirtish, you cannot be a man who wants to grab money from others.” A person who is aggressive cannot be a Sahaja Yogi.

“All such people were thrown out.” They didn’t like being thrown out, but some of them now understand that they made mistakes.

“So first thing is that you must develop your sense of chastity. Respect it and enjoy it. That happened because of your Mooladhara being awakened. That’s the first chakra on the left side, where you have Shri Ganesha.”

That I should be able to raise the kundalini, I knew I had come for that, not for anything else.

Ascent through the right side chakras
The right side also has deities. “On every chakra we have deities to compensate. For Shri Ganesha is in the centre and that’s how we were blessed by His powerful purity and we started understanding the beauty of purity, the power of purity. That’s how our right side, we finished off. Right side was for fighting, for killing, anger. There was no peace for these people.” They only “knew how to dominate others and to be intolerant.”

So then they rose to the level of Swadisthan with the aggressiveness of creative people. “Even now, we have many. They create all kinds of nonsense” to make a name and a position from right Swadisthan.

“On the Nabhi chakra, they went all out to make money – not Lakshmi, but money…. They cheated the whole world. With this money that they got, they did all kinds of bad things. Either they cheated or they were aggressive. Cheating was very much in the left side countries like India and aggressiveness in the right side countries.

“In the centre, what quality we have at the Swadisthana is the creativeness.” The creativeness of art is very beautiful, deep and absolutely spiritual. “That vanished and people started showing even the incarnations full of dirty habits. All kinds of filth came in….

“In Nabhi, people got after money. Left-sided people were making money. Right-sided were aggressive with their money. If they’re earning, they thought they were on top of the world…. All this finished them off. It’s finishing. It will come to that point where they will realize that money is not for destroying, but for construction, constructing of the country, constructing of the human beings together to bring peace and love among them, for helping, for doing all kinds of good things.

“Then the same right-sided people were to the chakra of the Mother and they were horrible mothers, tried to dominate their children, dominate everyone and could not sacrifice anything for the children. We have had enough of these women who are aggressive with their husbands, are aggressive with their children. And even the motherhood among men is dead and finished.

“All that kind of lot, when I came on this Earth, I saw. I was shocked…. At the Nabhi chakra only they were lost. But now it is the Mother’s chakra. They had no fatherhood, no motherhood. They drove out their children – very selfish, self-centred, dominating parents.

“This was the Heart chakra. Then came the collective chakra…. At the Vishuddhi … they wanted to occupy the whole world as their own, to become emperors and they formed empires and misbehaved to such an extent that it’s not humanly possible to behave like that. They really were rakshasas … and those rakshas qualities are still there.” They create people who are against spirituality and are aggressive.

The result was “a two-sided world, where there are people who are aggressive and the people who are tortured. This two-sided world exists even now, but is much less.”

To change others
“Thanks to the collective understanding, there are many good institutions that were established, but they’re not working out” because the men at the head are controlling others and not themselves. “All their behaviour has spoiled all the work of this chakra.”

Everywhere today there’s war, fighting, killing and destruction going on. There are so many spiritual people now, but they have become very quiet and peaceful, enjoying their spiritual life, “but that doesn’t bring peace.

You have to be dynamic and you have to bring peace in the world. You have to do something about it. We are very much satisfied with our progress, but we are not bothered as to see what is the progress others have done, how far they have gone, where can we meet them,” how can we change them.

“At My level, I can change many things, but at your level how many people have you changed? What have you done? That has to be seen. Still, you live with your ego on the Agnya and you are very happy with your peace, with everything you have got through Sahaja Yoga.

“This is the biggest calamity that the world is facing today, that those who are also spiritual, those who have achieved great heights are least bothered as to what good has to be done. What they’re doing is to enjoy their own spirituality … but they have done no collective work to change people.” Some are doing a little, but “the rest of them are having a good time, enjoying themselves in such a manner that people accept them as great souls, good people, that’s all.

“I would like you to now introspect and find out how much collective work you have done, how many people you have got like that. With whom are you talking? How many people have you told about Sahaja Yoga? Only so many are there. Christ had only twelve disciples. They’re much more dynamic than you are.

“So now, you should take to the right side. And when you take to the right side, we’ll create dynamic people, not just some useless, patient, very quiet, peaceful people. This is not the aim of Sahaj Yog. The aim of Sahaja Yoga is to change, change so many. And those who are doing that, all My blessings are with them, but those who are just keeping to themselves, it is not a very good thing. In your country, how many people have got to Sahaja Yoga? Just find out with how many people you have worked it out?”

The aim of Sahaja Yoga is to change, change so many. And those who are doing that, all My blessings are with them.

The right side is missing
“So yours is not a complete yoga. Yours is a partial yoga of the left side, where you are very loving….

“I’m not saying that you should become aggressive in any way, but even I have seen people want to be leaders. They want to be something great, but how many people have they given Realization? How many people have they talked about Sahaja Yoga? “We are using Sahaja Yoga for our greatness, for our understanding of ourselves. This is not why Sahaja Yoga has been brought to you. It has been brought to you for giving Realizations to many people.”

The younger people are “not to waste their Sahaj energies on nonsense, as the old people have done. You better go ahead and talk to people about Sahaj Yog and spread the Sahaj Yog.” Running schools and looking after the destitute is not your job. “Your job is to create more Sahaja Yogis, more Sahaja Yoginis, but that is not there…. The right side is missing. You should come to the right side. Go all ahead. Nothing will happen to you.

“Nobody can kill you. Nobody can disturb you. Nobody can arrest you. Take it from Me. You have powers, but if you don’t use them, you are like this. That is why we have come to the stagnated point, that we should know we have to use our right side. Right side is very important.”

Now the time has come for you to do something more than what the saints have done.

The time to do more
At Guru Puja “I’ll tell you about right side, what right-sided things you have. Now you cannot become left-sided, whatever you may try. So you use your right side in the right direction, with the right understanding…. Now the time has come for you to do something more than what the saints have done before, to work it out that way, not to keep to yourself, that you have a family, you have very nice children, having, enjoying, all that. That’s not what the Sahaja Yoga is for. Sahaja Yoga is for transforming the whole world.

“You have to think about it. What are you doing? Where are you? And what have you achieved out of Sahaj Yog?”

At Agnya, Sahaja Yogis can bear anything. That is not what we want. “We want to remove the sufferings of others, remove the aggression of others.” That kind of organization and understanding we don’t have. “If that works out, you will be different people.

“So we have become like saints, sitting in their hermit halls … not more than that. So better try to do something positive, without aggression.

“I know some of you are still very aggressive … but if you get into the mood of working out collectively, then you will realize what mistakes you have, still what is lacking in your personality. That is very important.”

Many Sahaja Yogis falter at the Agnya. “At Agnya, I have told that you must forgive, but that doesn’t mean that you allow people to do wrong things. Because you want to forgive, it’s very easy not to fight, not to say anything, just keep out, just forgive.” This is not correct. “You go and talk to that person and tell him it is wrong. You have to face it. If you cannot face it, then you are useless, just like any other people….

We have to understand that vibrations and the ability to cure is not everything. “You have to spread it. You have to go in the public. You have to be collective on this point and you have to spread Sahaja Yoga. With so many Sahaja Yogis all over the world, we have not progressed much….

“You have to plan what you want to do, how you want to do it and how you want to spread Sahaj Yog. It’s very important. Because you people are good at … talking about Sahaja Yoga, singing about Sahaja Yoga, all these things are useless unless and until you have concrete proof of getting many more people in Sahaja Yoga.”

In a small country like Turkey there are twenty-five thousand Muslim Sahaja Yogis. “They care for their Self Realization and for giving Self Realizations to others. It’s very surprising how it has worked out, how it has spread.”

It’s a very important day that you worship Me as Adi Shakti, but you should know that Adi Shakti has to be a complete form.

Think of others
“So instead of thinking of your problems, of your enemies, of your powers, think of giving power to others and making them Sahaja Yogis. It’s very important. If you are in Sahasrara, then you have all the powers. In Sahasrara, if you do not spread Sahaja Yoga, what’s the use of getting Realization?” To keep it to yourself is very selfish. Instead of spreading your own glory and name, “please try to get more people to Sahaj Yog. Go into a very dynamic force.

“So many people have complained to Me that Sahaja Yogis are nothing but dead people.” I have done so much work, so why not you? “In your country have you worked it out all over?” Until you have done it, “you are not complete and the Adi Shakti’s powers you have not understood in its full form….

“It’s a very important day that you worship Me as Adi Shakti, but you should know that Adi Shakti has to be a complete form.” It cannot be just of the left side. You should not only spread Sahaja Yoga, but you should also make others Sahaja Yogis and make them realize what it is.

“All My blessings, all My love, all My powers I give you. But try.”

Why I’m On This Earth
Guru Puja, 21 July 2002, Cabella Ligure

“In India, they’re all awaiting for the monsoons and they’re so much worried because the rain did not come.” I gave a bandhan to the rain, but it came to Italy. “I was told that in Italy you needed rain very much….

“All the understanding of the problems of our powers is there and the rain … is so kind that it works at the right time. I am surprised at the quick behavior and obedience of the rain.”

Guru Puja started on Sunday evening. It started with a miracle. When Shri Mataji was about to speak there was a loud sound of thunder as if the nature itself was saluting Her. The timing was so exact, that perhaps even the new yogis, for whom this puja was a first, were filled with stronger faith. Then rain started pouring down outside of the puja pendal.
— Alla Kulkarni

Spirituality is most important
“Today is a great day for all of us because we are celebrating the Guru Puja. I was remembering all the great gurus who came on this Earth to teach the world about the truth. So many of them were here and they tried their level best to explain to humanity what is spirituality, but it’s such a disparity that people never understood that spirituality is the most important thing we need, that we have to be one with the Divine Power.”

All the endeavours of humans “have been in the wrong direction.” They did not seek the truth, but something like self emancipation or self progress. “In that, they lost that they had to first seek spirituality, which is the most important thing…. We had two types of journeys. One is through the left side or another through the right side.” In India many people went to the jungles and became saints by “doing right side tapasya … going into the five elements, one after another, and mastering the five elements.”

There is truth in this. A candle flame can tell you of your inner state. “If you are possessed or if you are not, a candle can tell you…. It is competent to cure you.

“That’s why in India, Agni was worshipped, this light was worshipped, the fire was worshipped. That was worshipped first. They must have discovered that the fire knows everything.”

They knew about the inner awareness of the elements. “That’s why they worshipped those elements. So before the puja, they used to call all the Deities who belonged to those elements to witness their puja, but that turned out to be right-sided movement.”

If Sahaja Yoga is just with you, you cannot be a guru…. It means the one who gives.

Aparajita Hymn
in praise of the Divine Mother, from the Deva Mahatmyam

Ya Devi sarva buteshu
Vishnumayati Shabdita
Namas tasyai, Namas tasyai
Namas tasyai, Namo namah.

To the Devi who in all beings is called Vishnumaya
Salutations to Her
Salutations to Her
Salutations to Her
Salutations to Her again and again.

Chetanyata … consciousness
Buddhi … intelligence
Nidra … sleep
Kshuddha … hunger
Chaya … reflection
Shakti … power
Trishna … thirst
Kshanti … forgiveness
Jati … genius
Lajja … modesty
Shanti … peace
Shraddha … faith
Kanti … lustre
Lakshmi … good fortune
Vritti … activity
Smrti … memory
Daya … compassion
Tushti … contentment
Matr … mother
Bhranti … error

The left and right sides
“Without the left side, right side is very dangerous. If you, however, don’t have right side, of course, it’s a big dangerous thing also, but first you must have development of your left side. That is what, to begin with, we had in Sahaja Yoga.

“Left side is compassion, is love, universal feeling or we can say is the blessings of the Devi,” which are described in the Devi Mahatmyam, “that the Goddess resides within you as so many things. She resides in you as shraddha, as She resides in you as sleep. She resides in you as illusion, branthi. All kinds of things are there on the left-hand side, which are already described and when I told you about Sahaja Yoga, I wanted to make your left side very strong….

“People who took to right side became very aggressive people and they had mastered the essence of these five elements. That’s all right, but they were extremely hot-tempered, so much so that they used to curse people…. They used to say things which were not kind and they didn’t believe in the universality. It was such a dangerous thing that they took….

“Because they had no compassion, no love, nothing but their powers of the right side,” these gurus used to curse people. Such people who are only on the right side “without the bhakti, without the blessing of the Divine can become rakshasas actually, can become a great danger [thunder sounds] for humanity. This is a very serious thing. Through your intelligence, through your thinking power, your ego can go to any limit and create problems within you.”

Diseases on the right
The ultimate extent of this problem is many incurable diseases, such as blood cancer. “But even if it is cured, you can go back to that kind of aggressiveness, thinking that you are very right. Such people always try to find faults with others … but not with themselves. Their attention is outside, not on themselves. They never see what’s wrong with them, but they always see what’s wrong with others. By doing that, they are climbing the ladder of a horrible right side, which can give you horrible diseases….

“If you get rid of the blood cancer, then you can get into another problem … called Alzheimer’s…. If you don’t have that bhakti, that humility, that blessings of the Goddess, you can develop all such horrible diseases, which are not only fatal, but also very injurious to others.

“So, by being right-sided, you do not progress. You can become a big ascetic … who can curse others, who can put them into troubles” and you think that is a great power. “It is not at all because, though you are not suppressed by other powers … your own power takes your life.”

Express your right side
“So kundalini, when it is risen, the best thing is to go to the left side, not criticizing others, not talking ill of others, but seeing within you what’s wrong. Find out what is the pattern with you. First it starts with self importance … and, with this self importance, you go on troubling everyone and torturing everyone…. But, because of your right side movement, you can become very successful. Hitler was the climax of that. And that’s how people start taking to very, very cruel things.

“Nowadays, I think that some people are ruling everywhere with their right side. We do not have people who are using their left side and whenever they use their left side, they’re called as saints.

“Now you all have the powers of the left side. Some of you do have little bit right side also – doesn’t matter…. You have achieved your left side mastery. Kundalini awakening is there. You are one with the Divine. Now you can come to the right side and know about the right side and try to express your right side. You can express it not by dominating others, but dominating yourself, by self-examination, by understanding what’s wrong with you. Why do you behave like that? Why do you trouble others? Why do you overpower others?” Such dominating people organize and arrange. “Instead of organizing themselves, they’ll organize others. These things complicate, but if you have love and if you have bhakti, you can very, very easily dominate others in a very different manner.

“It is not that you dominate by cruelty, by oppression, but you dominate with your love. And you don’t want to dominate, but easily people get very much succumbed to love and to magnanimity, to generosity.

“So all these qualities you must first develop within yourself. It’s the left side problem that you should be very peaceful. You should give love to others. You should be generous. You should be kind and see how much it pays.”

Some people are extremely rude. “They can be rude to anyone. That’s their nature, which they should overcome with their left side. Rudeness is not the sign of a saint. A saint is extremely peaceful and never gets rude with others. So the introspection should work first of all. ‘Where are we wrong? What wrong things are we doing? What is our style?’ Once you discover that your style is already left side, then you should take to the right side and possess the power of right side.”

Express your right side. You can express it not by dominating others, but by dominating yourself.

Raja Janaka and Christ
“What are the powers of right side now, which are achieved through the left side perfection? We have some very great gurus on this line. One of them was Raja Janaka.” Although he was generous and good, he was also a king, “very much known for his impartiality, for his statesmanship and all kinds of beautiful things he did for his subjects…. He could not get disturbed with anything and people never understood why the greatest of greatest saints used to bow to him…. Nothing was above him. He was so detached with everything. He had everything, but he was so detached.” Raja Janaka is “a very good example of a person who had mastered his left and now who was the king.”

Later there were others who were extremely rich and powerful kings, “but inside they were absolutely like a divine personality. Nothing disturbed them. Nothing made them feel greater or happier. No position, no power was, to them, great. This is complete emancipation of human beings, that you are realized souls. You should be fully equipped with compassion and love and understanding, but … it should be expressed in the right way….

“Christ is another example.” The amount of forgiveness and love He has is tremendous. “He used to go onto mountains and preach about spirituality. Those were not very safe times because people didn’t like anybody talking like that. They hated you because He talked about God [thunder] and what they did to Him you know very well.”

Even though He was crucified “still we all respect Him as a great personality” because He gave His achievements and powers to others. He travelled. “He had no facilities, but still He went out to many people and tried to save them.

“This was the right side movement. That means Sahaja Yogis can also become right-sided – but like Christ. Otherwise, if they are right-sided, they’ll organize, they’ll do all kinds of things and have problems of the right side…. But once you are fully a left-sided master of Sahaja Yoga, then it’s very, very much needed to be a complete personality of spirituality that you should take to right side movement….

“The right side movement is the collectivity. You should not be satisfied with what you have got. It’s very easy to feel, ‘Oh, now we have got Realization, now what is there? We are on top of the world.’ That’s not so.”

Giving Realization
“You have to go out, talk to people. They will insult you. They’ll trouble you. They will do all kinds of things, but you are … already a realized soul. You can listen to them,” be good to them. “This is also a compassion that you don’t want to keep your Realization to yourself, but you want to do it for others also, so that they also get Realization.

“It’s very important. If you do not feel that way, the pity for the people who haven’t got Realization, think of the times you were not realized. These people are also not realized and they are having a bad time. They can be in for any trouble.”

You should not settle down with your Realization. “You should go all out to see that you give Realization to others and save them. You all have got Realization not for your sake. It’s not limited for you, but it is meant for others, that you have to give it to others. And as soon as you’ll start giving it to others, you’ll be amazed. So many qualities in you will come up because, when you see others, you find that what is lacking in them, what do they need, what you have to give, how you have to give.

“You can become anything. You can become a poet. You can become a writer.” These qualities will come out as you face others. “It comes as a reaction in you. All these qualities develop and you become a very good … artist.

“This is only possible if you meet other people and talk to them about Sahaja Yoga and tell them about your Self Realization. I know there will be problems…. There will be people who’ll oppose you, who say anything, all kinds of things against you and they’ll try to stop your activities and do all kinds of harm. It doesn’t matter…. You have to save them. That’s important.

In order to do this, “you should have no right-sided complications, otherwise they’ll all run away.” A spiritual person is “accepted to be a very humble person. Of course, because he’s humble, people will take advantage of him, say all kinds of things. It’s all right. It’s a part of the game, but he doesn’t mind. He doesn’t mind anything…. The main thing is that he has compassion. His compassion that he had before from the left side is now expanded and he wants to save the people.”

If people do not have food it is all right, “but if they do not get spirituality, what’s the use of their human life? Why did they evolve to this state?… If they do not get their Realization, that means this is worse than starving, worse than all kinds of poverty, worse than all kinds of diseases and troubles.”

So you should give them Realization, but first your left side should be very strong. “You should not start doing it unless and until you have strengthened your left side.

“Such a person is extremely humble, extremely straight, doesn’t grudge about anything, doesn’t grumble about anything and can adjust” to any circumstance. You may do anything for that person. You may try to get anything for that person. It’s all right. That person will accept, no doubt, but without any attachment to anything. Such a detached person is the one who can work it out, all kinds of propagation of Sahaj Yog.

“Today that is the greatest need of the world, that we have to have more Sahaja Yogis. Now people are so shy to do that.” People who are without truth spread their false ideas. “So talk about this to everyone. Bring them to Sahaj Yog.”

The right side movement is the collectivity. You should not be satisfied with what you have got.

You all have got Realization not for your sake. It’s not limited for you, but it is meant for others, that you have to give it to others.

Advice of the Guru
“It’s a very important day because, as a Guru Puja, they say that a guru cannot give anything to you, but I can give you the advice and the advice [is] that you enlarge your heart, you become humble and try to spread Sahaja Yoga with humility, not with aggressiveness. That is extremely important. If you can do that, then you will do full justice to this life, which is a spiritual life. Without that, you cannot achieve, cannot achieve the strength of spirituality. For that, you have to understand that it’s very, very important that you should give Sahaja Yoga a full chance through your wisdom.”

Forget about the troublesome acts of others. “All such persons are not important for a Sahaj Yogi. But if you start on proper lines, you will be amazed. You’ll meet so many people who want peace of mind, peace of heart and a complete oneness with the Divine.

“They may not accept. They may not say. They may have gone to the wrong people…. But, despite everything, they would like to have a real spiritual peace within themselves. Is a very common desire nowadays among people, but to approach that and to reach that, you have to take to a life of a very simple personality.”

If you are so much interested in money, so-called powers or your own ambitions, “then Sahaja Yoga cannot do anything.” You should instead be interested in your own compassion and understanding today’s world and its turmoil. “What we have to do is pass them the knowledge of the Divine. That should be your desire and that is what you’ll feel very much comfortable with.”

All other wants and desires are transitory. The desire to spread Sahaja Yoga “is so beautiful that you go on working on it and every time you do that you will be so joyous and happy, you’ll have no problems of any kind. That’s the sign of greatness of Sahaj Yog and I want you all to become like that.”

Today “we are thinking of all the great saints who came on to this Earth and who tried to lead us … tried to spread the truth all over the world. They suffered a lot, they had problems, so many problems, but they worked very hard in every way to spread Sahaja Yoga and talk about God and divinity.

“All that is what today you have to give Me, a promise that whenever you get any other human being, you can tell them about Sahaja Yoga.” This is not only important. It is the “immediate need of the world.”

“If you understand this point, that at this time why are you in this world and what is the need of the world, you will immediately start feeling the responsibility. Whether you are a man or a woman is not important. Go all out to preach … make people understand about Sahaj Yog in every way that is possible and I think then you will become complete as gurus.

“If Sahaja Yoga is just with you, you cannot be a guru.” Being a guru doesn’t mean preaching, talking and lecturing about Sahaja Yoga. “It means the one who gives Realizations to others.” The number of people to whom you have given Realization is “not to be counted, but to be felt within like ripples, waves of the ocean of love in your heart. So beautiful it is to see that people get Realization and are immersed in the joy of spirituality. That’s what I want you to do. That’s why I’m on this Earth.

“I had to suffer also quite a lot.” Such sufferings don’t matter. “I was watching it just like a drama, so it’s over.”

What we have to do is pass them the knowledge of the Divine. That should be your desire and that is what you’ll feel very much comfortable with.

Muhammed was misunderstood
Muhammed has been misunderstood. “I feel happy that at least you people have realized his greatness and have understood.”

They finished Muhammed and his family and “they started another horrible thing called Sunnis. Now the Sunna religion is not near the truth at all. It’s some sort of a very aggressive and a very cruel religion and that started spreading everywhere. The real Islam religion of Muhammed-sahib was not there….

“So this is also a very wrong thing that a man was so great and so much of spirituality was not accepted and somebody who killed him is now accepted. It can happen in anything. But the worst it has happened is in the Islamic world, which is very dangerous.” In the name of God, they are doing many bad things….

“It is not the fate of Muhammed-sahib it has happened. It’s not the fate of reality it has happened, but it’s an eye-opener for all of us to see that the truth is always challenged by untruth and we should stand by the truth whatever may happen and a day will come when people realize that this was the wrong thing they had all the time been following” and that they “have been doing all kinds of nonsensical things.

“All this will work out, I’m sure, very soon. If My desire is that powerful, I’m sure that they will realize that to be kind, to be nice, to be compassionate is the best way to feel happy, nothing more than that.

“May God bless you.”

It was a complete silence after the puja and during the ceremony of countries presenting gifts to Shri Mataji.
— Alla Kulkarni

It’s an eye-opener for all of us to see that the truth is always challenged by untruth.

Day of the Guru
“It’s very interesting the way you have found out today is the real Guru Purnima.

It started as a part of a French seminar in the hangar at Cabella. Our brothers and sisters from France wanted to do puja and then go to the castle and offer a music program to the Adi Shakti.
When Shri Mataji received this request, She said they had chosen the day of Guru Purnima and if there was to be puja, it would be better if She was present.
At about 5 pm, this news came from the castle and it spread like wildfire. Telephone calls and SMS cellphone messages flew around Italy. Yogis jumped into cars and set off. The people who were in the hangar still, after Guru Puja, just three days before, couldn’t believe their luck. The French yogis calmly prepared for the puja.
At 8 pm there were nearly three hundred people in the hangar, including the Daglio children’s camp, and then Shri Mataji arrived. It was so incredible for many of us who had never been so close to Mother before during a puja. She spoke about this being the real day of the Guru.

Shri Mataji said they had chosen the day of Guru Purnima and if there was to be a puja, it would be better if She was present.

The Purnima is the day when the moon is full,” but for the convenience of the Sahaja Yogis, we have to have the puja on the weekend. “This time, it was, I think, two days before.

“So it doesn’t matter, after all, the moon is there for us and we are for the moon, so it can’t be something that would have very wrong in it.”

The Guru Principle
“I have already told you such a lot about the Guru Principle.” People have come on this Earth, mostly born-realized, and they never gave Realization. “Because of their Self Realization, as they had, they have so much of knowledge and that is what they try to impart to people.

“They knew all about chakras. Everything they knew. Somehow, must be in their past life achievements that they knew it. Perhaps some of them were disciples of other very great people.” They had full ideas about Self Realization.

Outside of India, Mohammed was the only one who spoke about miraj, “the ascent through our kundalini…. Also He talked of the resurrection time when your hands will speak. Two things He said – first that your hands will speak when you will have your Realization. It’s a very great thing to say because that is how you can ascertain and you can be sure that you got your Realization. That’s the sign He gave. And the second thing He talked about – miraj and the white horse – He said was nothing but the kundalini. He didn’t use the word kundalini, but He said it’s a white horse.

“So He is the one who knew what should happen to the people when they got their Self Realization. That’s the great revelation to all of you and of such a help to Sahaja Yoga. You are all realized souls because you can feel the vibrations…. He explained it very clearly.”

So many saints
“We have so many saints in India, so many of them, one better than the other, and … whatever they say is so remarkable,” but human beings never realized there were so many saints here. “They were not incarnations, but they were born realized souls.”

Because they were human beings, their explanations were understood by humans. The words of an incarnation are “something from the beyond.” How the realized souls “have talked about the various things is very remarkable.

“Firstly, most of them were poets…. We had Kabir in India. We don’t know how he was born, where he was from, who were his parents. It’s absolutely not known, despite that you can only make out from the poetry that he was the great, great Sahaj Yogi and how he has described things very interestingly. He brought forth so many fundamental truths in his poetry and he talked about it. He didn’t belong to any religion, as such. When he died there was a fight between Hindus and Muslims, ‘What should we do with his body?’ And they say when they had lifted the sheet which was covering his body, they found flowers – two types of flowers, one for Hindus and one for Muslims. So that’s how he has solved the problems of this stupid fight people were having.”

I bless you all to do this work, which was left half done by the saints. It’s your duty to complete it.

Self Realization is my saddle;
In the stirrup of Sahaj.
I place my foot and ride
Astride the steed of my mind.

Come, my steed, I’ll take you
On a trip to heaven;
If you balk,
I’ll urge you on
With the whip of divine love.

Says Kabir: The adept riders
Remain aloof from both
The Vedas and the Koran.

Kabir

A different personality
“In Sahaj Yoga we are not belonging to any such stupid religion. We belong to one religion, that is Vishwa Nirmal Dharma and all the stupidity of all these religions we should really throw away because what you just see now today everywhere – every religious group is fighting each other, beating each other, finishing each other – is not the way a religious person should be.

“For a yogi or for a saint, cruelty is absolutely not there. They will sacrifice their lives. They will do anything, but they will not be cruel to any other person. Now, those who, in the name of God and in the religion, are cruel are actually not at all, by any chance, religious people.

“So this is what the perversion of religion is. We all should understand, if we belong to Sahaja Yoga, then for us, kindness, sweetness, compassion and love are the main qualities we should have and if you don’t have that, then we are not a Sahaj Yogi.

“So we are a different clan.” We are a different personality “who are really realized souls, who are above all these nonsensical ideas and who have vibrations. But, as I said, that now you must spread it because I have come on this Earth just for people to get their emancipation, get their Realization and, unless and until all the people who believe in their emancipation get it, I won’t be happy.”

Unless and until all the people who believe in their emancipation get it, I won’t be happy.

Becoming is important
“There are many people who do believe, but [have] not yet got their Realization, so you have to work and you will be amazed. You will find people who are very anxious to get their Realization.

“It will work out on this Guru Purnima day. It is a very auspicious day.

“I bless you with a special power that you can give Realization to others. Don’t get involved in your own problems. That’s not important. That will all be solved….

“What you should do is to see what is your problem within you, what is happening within you, why we are having a problem within, what is our duty, why we have got our Self Realization, why we have got this wealth of spirituality and what should we do with it.

“I tell you, really think about it every day, even for half an hour. You will realize that you are very well equipped people. Saints have done so much. They have written so many things. They have fought the people. They did everything. You don’t have to do anything like that, but one thing is that you must spread Sahaja Yoga.

“Even now, Sahaj Yoga is not so much accepted everywhere. People don’t know about it. It’s surprising, while all kinds of horrible gurus are very well known. So we have to do it by our behaviour, by our understanding, by our whole life. People should say that these are … rare people and different people.

“I am happy today is another day of Guru Purnima, which is a very auspicious day and to be regarded as a very big blessing for you because … this is a certificate that you all are capable of being gurus. You have to become that. Becoming is important in Sahaj Yoga…. All other things are really of no use. You have to become.”

Ladies are especially shy. “They can do a lot and they should work it out. They are shy for nothing at all. What is the need to be shy? They are very shy ladies and they just don’t get into the whole working of Sahaj Yoga. You should. If the ladies start talking about it, I think it will work much faster.

“And I bless you all to do this work, which was left half done by the saints. It’s your duty to complete it.

“May God bless you.”

I bless you with a special power that you can give Realization to others.

A magical occasion
Shri Mataji then invited the children onto the stage to wash Her Feet. At this point, every child in the hangar converged on the stage. There seemed to be even more than during Guru Puja. As there was no age limit specified, there were some rather large children and it was beautiful to see the joy on the faces of teenagers, who probably had thought they would never have such an opportunity again.
After this, some presents were given, along with flowers from various collectives and then the French yogis asked permission to start their concert. Already there was such a lovely family atmosphere in the hangar and incredibly strong vibrations, but when the Yuva Shakti started singing, we felt like we were being lifted into another dimension. This was followed by two beautiful qawwalis that had everyone dancing. The singing was of an extraordinarily high quality and was followed by flute music and a violin raga, both of which were absolutely wonderful.
It felt like we were in paradise at the Lotus Feet of our Guru.
At midnight, Shri Mataji left us after nearly four truly unforgettable hours.

Divine Movement
New York Public Program, 22 August 2002

Silent and humble among its towering neighbours, the Ethical Culture Center on 64th Street and Central Park West in New York City is a beautiful building, colourful stained glass windows set in a stone facade, with Saint George and the dragon and playful angels in the architecture.

There was an aura of excitement and anticipation as we made our way through the corridor of beaming yogis and seekers. Andrea Cousins made a spontaneous and inspired speech that focused the packed hall on the tremendous privilege they had attained, calling them to take their place in the divine movement spreading around the world.

As in previous NY public programs, a series of miracle slides were shown. However, this time there was a feeling of receptivity and awe coming from the newcomers. The sense of anticipation for Shri Mataji’s arrival was clearly heightened by seeing these miracle photographs.

And then all rose to their feet as the Queen of the Universe appeared, walking on stage in Her pure white sari.

Shri Mataji followed Her gentle speech with a short Realization session. About ninety percent of the audience raised their hands. The rest hadn’t felt the cool breeze. For a moment, it seemed as though Shri Mataji was content to leave things like that – “Most of you have got it” – but a rare scene followed. It was announced that those who hadn’t felt it could come on stage and approach Shri Mataji personally.

Shri Mataji was soon surrounded, with people gathering around the overflowing stage. For what seemed like more than an hour, Shri Mataji personally worked on seeker after seeker.

In Her physical presence, Her children moved through the crowd, offering assistance, vibrations and answering questions. Cool winds began to blow even stronger as the bhajan group took to the stage once more.

Eyes were full of awe and wonder even as people finally stepped back outside. They looked out at the midnight-lit streets with new eyes and surely, in those first few moments, knew that with them, their city also had been transformed.
— Ziya Dikbas

Shri Mataji invited those who had not felt the vibrations to come up on stage and personally worked on most of them.

When Shri Mataji arrived, She was received with a long, standing ovation from an extraordinary group of seekers who, by this time, instinctively sensed that the person they had come to see – Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi – is Divine.

After the auspicious moment of en masse Self Realization, Shri Mataji asked how many had felt the cool breeze. A sea of hands rose up from the audience with only a few empty spaces between the cresting waves. Shri Mataji then invited those who had not felt vibrations to come up to the stage. There was no pushing and shoving – could this really be New York? – as an unhurried flow of seekers moved silently toward the stage like clouds on a mild summer’s day.

As he watched the others making their way toward the stage, one man who had not yet felt the vibrations leaned toward the woman standing next to him and said in frustration, “Why are they going up there? She hasn’t really done anything. She just talked about love.”

“But that’s the whole point,” the woman responded. “You don’t have to do anything. All you need is love.”

Shri Mataji worked on everyone who had come up to Her, helping each of Her children to feel the reality of Self Realization.

One Romanian yogini captured the depth of those incredible moments in a series of photographs that trace the transformation of a scene of humble seekers kneeling at the Feet of their Mother to an image of majestic tongues of flame.

“I have never seen anything quite like it. I looked down from the balcony and saw a semi-circle of hundreds of seekers pressed close to Shri Mataji,” said one New York yogi who has been in Sahaj for twenty years. “The scene was so dramatic. Everyone was totally attentive. They really wanted to be near Her.”

“For me, one of the most satisfying aspects of the program was seeing minority populations so well represented,” said another yogi. “After the program, black brothers and sisters came up to me and said, ‘Hey, She definitely has something going on and I need to find out more about it.’”
— Ann Thorpe

I love America very much and in New York City I feel like I am home. I usually don’t take many pictures, but I felt the desire to show to everyone how many seekers were in America, as I was so impressed by this program. Going home, when I saw the pictures, I was overwhelmed with joy and love for all Americans. I always dreamed of making a miracle picture and I am extremely happy that this could happen in America, where all the dreams can come true.
— Anca Spatariu

Divine Vibrations
Landmarks in Sahaja Yoga Research and Health Centre

In February of this year, I was at the Sahaja Yoga Health Centre at Belapur, in order to dust off some more negativity from my subtle system.

On the 19th of February, it was the sixth anniversary of the operation of the centre. For the occasion, a puja was offered to our Divine Mother. Vibrations were very strong and it was very auspicious to have attended such a puja. The event marks a milestone and it is a good opportunity to say a few things about the centre, about its operation and the need for it.

•

Our Divine Mother Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi inaugurated the Sahaja Yoga Health Centre on the 19th of February 1996, as a gift to humanity. And truly a gift to humanity it has been. The centre was set up under the direction of Prof. Dr. U.C. Rai, a well-known medical scientist with a full list of academic honours. Professor Rai was instrumental in organizing medical conferences and presenting papers on Sahaja Yoga, explaining to scientists and laymen the curative powers of Sahaja Yoga practice. His efforts resulted in many scientists in Russia accepting the medical aspects of Sahaja Yoga as part of the treatments offered in Russian hospitals. One of his last achievements was the presentation of Sahaja Yoga practice at the American National Institutes of Health, one of the world’s most prestigious medical research institutes.

Prof. Dr. U.C. Rai also authored a book titled Medical Science Enlightened, where he presents many pioneering facts regarding the medical application of Sahaja Yoga. Now, with every day that goes by, the validity of Sahaja Yoga treatments have become more and more prominent in highly reputed medical journals.

After the passing away of Prof. Rai in July 2001, a new “in-charge,” Dr. Madhur Rai, the daughter-in-law of Prof. Rai, was appointed to the centre by our Holy Mother. May we all give a bandhan and wish her a successful career at the centre and that she is as successful in promoting Sahaja Yoga in the medical field as was the late Prof. Rai.

The grounds are highly vibrated. Our Holy Mother has Her attention on the health centre and She affects all cures.

Those with medical problems
The question was raised in the past, as to why Sahaja Yogis need to come to the centre for treatment. The question hardly needs any answer when one has some evident medical or severe emotional problem. In such a case, one should consult a physician and determine the ailment and its cause. Normal practice is for Sahaja Yogis to follow the recommendations of doctors.

It should be noted that the centre has achieved cures or improvements in cases where medical science could offer no relief whatsoever. Even if you receive the full medical treatment specified by your doctor, you may still wish to come to the clinic. Sahaja Yoga practice is the way to cure a medical problem. This must be emphasized.

In sickness, the medical profession simply eliminates the symptom. Medical practice does not cure. A cure is effected only when the negativity in the subtle system that caused a disease to manifest is itself eliminated. Otherwise, the cause is still in the subtle system and the patient simply begins to work himself into something worse.

Only fragments remain of the works of the ancient Greek philosopher Heracletus from Ephesus (circa 500 BC). In one of them he says, “The doctors, by cutting and burning, they work up the same as the diseases and they receive payment, which they do not deserve.” This is as applicable then as it is today, despite all the progress in medicine.

Socrates has explained this more fully by saying that “No doctor knows himself. This is the reason he is a doctor.” Putting this in the language of our Sahaj culture, it says that “No doctor is self-realized and this is the reason he is a doctor.”

Yogis with medical problems should consider going to the centre to benefit from the experience and focused attention of the Sahaja Yoga doctors there.

Those without medical problems
With respect to persons who have no medical problems, the natural question is why one should take the big step and come to the health centre. Once Prof. Rai quoted our Holy Mother, who said that the negativity in Sahaja Yogis is so strong, that they cannot feel their catches.

This is a very strong statement by our Holy Mother. It indicates that unless you can feel your catches, your spiritual ascent may be very difficult to achieve. It is after you understand your problem that you can eliminate it.

In order to appreciate Shri Mataji’s remark, She has stated that the number of diseases that exist is the total number of combinations and permutations of the chakras. On the three channels there are twenty-one chakras, so the total number of combinations and permutations can be computed as the product of 21 x 20 x 19 x 18 … 3 x 2 x 1.

I tried to compute this expression on my computer in integer format and the computer run out of numbers. So I used Stirling’s approximate method to estimate the value of this product and it turns out to be of the order of ten raised to the eighteenth power. This is a fantastically big number and is of the order of a quintillion. This shows the hopeless task with which the medical profession and the bio-technologists are faced in trying to determine the genetic code of diseases in order to effect cures.

At the same time, it also gives an idea of the fact that in each one of us, the condition of the subtle system is not as simple as it might be indicated because we feel a chakra catching. Of course, no human ever attains this fantastic number of catches.

To ascertain the condition of the subtle system and to treat the various catches and cross-catches, a person who has a well developed vibratory awareness is required. Such people are the doctors to be found in the health centre at Belapur. Such people are the ones who can balance a subtle system and get a person on their way to spiritual ascent.

What this points out is the fact that when people who have lived a average life and have had no unusual experiences, it is not easy to feel and understand the inner workings of affirmations, mantras and treatments.

A stay at the Health Centre can be a tune-up. Where we don’t have a disabling condition such as paralysis, extreme depression or schizophrenia, we may still find a significant part of our life dissatisfying, with the same catches in our chakras getting cleared out, but then returning year after year. A visit to the centre is indicated if you have ongoing, persistent problems that your regular Sahaja Yoga routine is not curing.
The people I met at the hospital had symptoms ranging from obvious physical disabilities to subtler, inner difficulties that made their Sahaja life unfulfilled.
At home, it is easy for some of us to neglect the basics in Sahaja Yoga, as we get busy with our work, our families and our Sahaja Yoga responsibilities. Our daily footsoak and meditation can, at times, become not much more than rituals, where we are not removing the negativity which is accumulating every day in our subtle system. At the Health Centre, however, there is no “going through the motions.” If you’re not in a state of thoughtless awareness, if a treatment has not been practised correctly or sufficiently to improve a problem, you have a trained Sahaj doctor to advise and help clear out the blockage with their bandhans, candling and other treatments.
— Mark Taylor

The Mother Kundalini
One must come to feel the miracle of Mother Kundalini working inside each one of us. It is only then, after we experience this miracle, that we can start our true spiritual ascent.

Our Holy Mother has always stressed the fact that we have to clean our chakras. Our Holy Mother has blessed me to have the experience of some of our inner workings and truly it is the goal we have to work towards, if we are to change the world and establish the rule of Shri Adi Shakti in this universe.

One such interesting experience I had two days after returning home from the health centre was that, as I set myself for my nightly footsoak, I felt, coming up in my Ida Nadi, the pure desire for God. If you read the prayer book for the left nadi, you will read that one of its names is Kundalini and, as our Holy Mother has said, Kundalini is the pure desire for God. It is these experiences that help one grow in Sahaja Yoga, where Sahaja Yoga is no longer a mental concept, but a living experience.

Monitoring your progress
If you have been in Sahaja Yoga for some time, you must have the experience of feeling a little bit better every day, so that if you miss your footsoak and your meditation, you feel you have missed something very valuable.

In the Sahaja Yoga Prayer Book (A Collection of Prayer and Praise, “Prayer for Improvement,” page one) our Holy Mother gives us a way of monitoring our progress. If you have been in Sahaja Yoga for some time and you have not begun the improvements that our Holy Mother lists, then you must seriously consider that you should come to the health centre in order to get yourself started for your spiritual ascent. You must get to the point that you have the experience of Mother Kundalini working inside you. Then you will truly appreciate this miracle that our Holy Mother has made available to each one of us.

I would not hesitate to say that some collectives may wish to send a representative to the clinic for treatments for a minimum of a three week stay. In this way, the collective may get a first hand report of the way things are done, so that they may have some notion as to what it takes to make a breakthrough in one’s spiritual advancement.

•

Routine at the centre
During your stay at the health centre your attention is set on your spiritual progress and on nothing else. There is a morning meditation at 8 am and an evening meditation at about 7 pm, which includes watching a video or listening to a talk by our Holy Mother from an audio tape. You will have the opportunity to get up at 4 am, in order to get to the lawn for a very early meditation and prayers. In this way, you will get the experience of the difference it makes to have early meditation, as our Holy Mother urges us. You will also get the experience of feeling Mother Earth as a Goddess who is there to help you by sucking from your feet all your negativity, when at this early hour you walk around saying Her mantra and asking Her to absorb the negativity.

The doctors see you twice a day and they prescribe to you the treatment that you have to give to yourself until the next time they see you. The idea of the treatment is to get the Ida and Pingala Nadis to balance, so that you are always on the Sushumna Nadi. In so doing, they can tell which chakras need to be corrected next, thus finding the way in the labyrinth of the cross-catches that exist in you.

The techniques used in the health centre are not different than what has already been published either in the Sahaja Yoga Prayer Book or in other treatment publications. What really counts is that the grounds are highly vibrated. Our Holy Mother has Her attention on the health centre and She effects all cures. It must be appreciated that the Goddess is realized by devotion. Once you are here, you are devoted, for there is nothing else to distract your attention. Mother has said that prayer is the greatest weapon of a Sahaja Yogi. The health centre is a very good place to learn devotion and surrender to our Holy Mother and to learn how to pray effectively.

•

If you are contemplating coming to the centre for treatment, you should inform the centre of your intent and wait to receive confirmation that there is space available for you. You should then provide the details of your arrival, so that someone will meet you at the airport. Usually the driver who will meet you holds a picture of our Holy Mother and it is a good idea for you to also conspicuously hold one.

As soon as you arrive at the health centre, you start feeling the Divine Attention and the Divine Vibrations.

During your stay here, your attention is set on your spiritual progress and on nothing else.
Theodore Efstathiou

It must be appreciated that the Goddess is realized by devotion.

As catches are cleared out, the doctors attend to the persistent, deeper, subtler negativity. Some of these can affect our attitude or our self-perception and, at this level, where part of our treatment requires introspection and honesty, the doctor is not only a clinician, diagnosing, treating and prescribing, but also a Sahaja Yogi and a friend, compassionate and surrendered to our Holy Mother, pouring into one’s chakras the powerful divine vibrations created by Shri Mataji. Every little bit of progress is cheered on by the doctor, every effort made is encouraged.
The doctors not only treat the catches, but also address the thoughts and worries that persist, telling an anecdote or suggesting that intense prayer to Shri Mataji will help. The doctors and staff are beautiful, cheerful and humorous yogis. All of one’s attention can be devoted to cleaning the chakras and strengthening the connection to the Divine Mother.
What makes treatment at the Health Centre in Belapur so special is that the centre is run strictly in accordance with Shri Mataji’s guidance and instructions.
For some of us, being there felt not so much like being in a hospital, as staying at an ashram operated under the direct supervision of Shri Mataji.
The centre is dawn-til-dusk undiluted Sahaja Yoga, without the distractions of life back home.
— Mark Taylor

I have come to build temples in the heart of human beings
Sahaja Yoga in Thailand: Our place in the virat

To help us start a collective in Thailand, we had the immense blessing of receiving Shri Mataji’s physical darshan five times over the past years.

Our Holy Mother’s last visit was in 1996 and was a very successful program with nearly a thousand people attending and several news reports on the event. At that time, Shri Mataji had also been invited to the national parliament and gave Realization to the president of the assembly. He was an old man, who didn’t know much about Shri Mataji or Sahaja Yoga and he politely asked Mother if She had come to visit the temples in Thailand, to which She answered, “I have come to build temples in the heart of human beings”

A few minutes after that, Shri Mataji was putting Her finger on his Agnya, raising his kundalini and he completely melted with the love of Shri Mataji. He told Her, “ I understand now that You have come for me, to give me Self Realization.”

The meeting, which was supposed to take only fifteen minutes went on for more than one hour and that gentleman said that next time he would arrange for Shri Mataji to give a talk to the members of parliament.

Since then, many more “temples” of Shri Mataji have been built in the heart of the Thai people. We have a collective of about seventy to eighty relatively established Sahaja Yogis, plus twenty to thirty newer people. Shri Mataji told us that we are part of the world superego, along with China and several other Southeast Asian countries.

She also told us that Shri Rama, in His quest for Shri Sita, had stayed in Thailand for a few years and that it was here that Shri Sita dropped Her jewels when Ravana carried Her away. “That’s why you had a lot of precious stones in the country,” explained Shri Mataji.

She also melted our hearts by saying, “Bangkok is My place.” And She added, “I have a plan for Thailand.” Remembering these kind words of our Holy Mother keeps us in high spirits in tough times, which can be quite often in this town of seven million inhabitants. Bangkok is also known as “Krungthep” or the City of Angels.

The Thai people are, by nature, very tolerant and easy going. They are also very religious, as Shri Mataji told us during the last Sahasrara Puja, stating that “it will work out.” And it is indeed very easy to give Realization here, as most people are, to a certain extent, familiar with meditation and highly respect people who meditate. Many Thai people have strong experiences and it is not rare to hear from new people that they feel that “a lotus is opening on top of their head” or that “there is water pouring out of their head.”

Recently, when a Sahaja Yogi asked a new person if he wanted to have a picture of Shri Mataji, he answered “What for? Since I got the experience two weeks ago, I can see Her with me all the time. She is there wherever I go.”

On the other hand, Thai people are also epicureans. They are people who, first and foremost, enjoy life and sometimes lack the necessary commitment and depth for full growth in Sahaj. Therefore, even though many get Realization and meditate using the picture of Shri Mataji, not as many people as we would like really attend the collective and get rooted in Sahaja Yoga. Nevertheless, we keep trying.

Our collective enjoys giving Realization, which is quite an easy thing here. Apart from our weekly meditation, we organize big programs every three months and, in general, have an attendance of around two hundred people, who we lead to an eight or ten week course on the chakras.

We also have a weekly meditation for the staff of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, a weekly meditation for children in a school in a suburb of Bangkok and another one every two weeks for children at a child abuse foundation. There is another school in a poor rural state up-country which has been “sponsored” by some Sahaja Yogis and where all children and teachers have gotten their realization.

However, since the Adi Shakti Puja this year, we felt that we should really be more active and find different ways to promote Sahaja Yoga, as all the above mentioned programs, even with good media coverage, are still far from Shri Mataji’s vision of a large scale Self Realization movement.

Some Sahaja Yogis have have had good results in promoting Sahaja Yoga with their office colleagues. Other Sahaja Yogis have started to organize small weekly meditations for their neighbours in their apartment buildings.

The biggest change for us, though, is that we have decided to go to the main public park of Bangkok every Saturday and Sunday at six in the morning and just give Realization to people. A group of about ten yogis go there with a board saying, “Sahaja Yoga” with the chakra chart and a picture of Shri Mataji on it. They put it in the ground and start meditating or giving each other vibrations. Meanwhile, one or two other yogis call the crowd and ask them to feel the kundalini energy themselves. After a few minutes, people just start to gather around the yogis and queue up to get Self Realization. Many are practising Tai Chi, Kung-Fu or even Hatha Yoga in the park and come to us on their way home. We were astonished to see that in a few hours we can give vibrations to up to a hundred people, which means that, if we do it on both Saturday and Sunday, we can reach between seven hundred to a thousand people per month.

It has definitely given us a tremendous pleasure to do this and the vibrations are really excellent, as if to show that this is Shri Mataji’s will and that we have Her full support. After three weeks, we have seen that several new people come back to get more vibrations or meditate a bit with us in the park and most really feel their kundalini going up. It has enabled us to reach people who otherwise might never have come to Sahaja Yoga and to do it in an environment which is more natural to them. It seems so easy that we wonder why we waited so long before trying. Since we started in the park, we have seen a strong increase of people coming to our weekly meditation program and hopefully we may even need to rent a bigger hall very soon.

This is an overview of our little Thai collective and we hope that the collective attention of our brothers and sisters worldwide will help us grow more in quantity and in quality.
— Pascal Sreshtaputra

Lumpini Park, Bangkok, July 6
I gave vibrations to Geoffrey so that people could see that something was happening, while Khun Sukhit stood behind and started to invite people to try. After not even two minutes, people started to gather around and all of us started to give Realization.
Very soon we were so busy that we didn’t have time to talk to each other and people were queuing up to get vibrations.
At least twenty people were always waiting for their turn, some of them so eager that they almost started to fight to decide who came first. There was also a Hatha Yoga group nearby and some of the members came to get Self Realizations. After that, they told all their friends and they asked us to guide a meditation for them after their Hatha Yoga session.
They were very happy and the teacher asked us to do it again every Saturday.
It is so joy-giving that I hope many of you will try it. I believe it is these kinds of things that Shri Mataji has in mind. We should be more active as a whole and use our powers. It will give us so much joy and so many vibrations to share the most important thing with other seekers of truth.

Globally One
Our place in the virat: Jharkhand India

This state has been formed with the blessings of our Divine Mother.

Jharkhand is a newly formed state in India, cut from the southern half of Bihar. The state has been formed following the demand from local tribes. It has eighteen districts and hardly four are developed. Most of the population is illiterate and involved in all kinds of blind faith and rituals.

Ranchi is the capital of Jharkhand. Our first Sahaja Yoga centre was started there by our sister, Pushpa Mohta, and today there are more than five hundred Sahaja Yogis.

Jamshedpur is an industrial town influenced by the Tata group of industries and there are two centres in this city. The halls are provided by the Tata company free of cost. The total number of yogis is about a hundred.

Daltonganj is a remote place totally surrounded by MCC (Maoist Communist Centre) militants. Sahaja Yoga started last year and the number of yogis has increased from one to now thirty. There have been a lot of arrests of militants and now Sahaja Yoga is going into both schools and factories.

There are now centres in another two districts, namely Gumla and Dhanbad.

This state of Jharkhand has been formed with the blessings of our Divine Mother. The government is of educated people and there have been a lot of new developments in the education sector. With many local tribal families coming to the Sahaja Yoga centres in all areas, we have a definite hope that the state will be blessed by Shri Mataji and all the sorrows will be eliminated.

With love, the collective of Jharkhand

Let us become globally one, united in a thread of Sahaja Yoga.

DATANGANJ INDIA – With the blessings of Shri Mataji, I went to a girls’ school to give Realization. The principal sister, Sabastina, allowed me to offer Sahaja meditation in the prayer room. Around forty-five to fifty girls and two male staff and three sisters, including the principal and three female teachers were present. We all sat on the Mother Earth.

I prayed to Shri Mataji and handed it over to Her. It was my first experience alone, facing so many of non-Sahaja Yogis. Shri Mataji took over and made me speak about Maria Montessori and her method of education, an enlightened system, and about the divine plan for children, which has been overlooked by the present educational system. I spoke about the plexuses and their uses and the related chakras, nervous system and nadis and more – whatever Shri Mataji made me speak. Everyone took Realization and the girls took the photos for meditation. The girls felt vibrations – some on the palms, some on the head. It was a beautiful experience. The vibrations were nice.

Three weeks later, I had a talk on the phone with Sister Sabastina. She has agreed to allow the tenth class to have weekly meditation in their moral science class for a few weeks. Please pray for us, that we grow in Sahaja Yoga and are able to spread Sahaj vibrations to all the students for ages to come.

Please also give a bandhan to the Daltonganj collective, as we are only twenty to twenty-five Sahaja Yogis and all are new. We started our centre in November 2001 after the public program.

Recently, with the blessings of Shri Mataji, twelve scout teachers took Realization in the centre. They were having some training program in the same premises where we have our weekly meetings.

Let us become globally one, united in a thread of Sahaja Yoga.
With love to all brothers and sisters of Sahaja Yoga.
Anuradha

JAMSHEDPUR INDIA – One of our Sahaja Yogis had a keen desire that a public program should be conducted in and around their area, near Jamshedpur in the Indian state of Jharkhand. We decided for the 13th and 14th of July and we were immediately blessed by our Divine Mother, when we were allotted by TISCO (a division of India’s Tata Industries) a very big hall free of cost for the program, follow-up and also for the centre once a week.

We started our campaign with the combined efforts of the Yuva Shakti and a ladies group. We had with us pamphlets in Bengali and Hindi. We started door to door, house to house, talked to a family representative, giving them a pamphlet, describing in a few words and then inviting them to the program with their family.

From the 8th to 12th, this kept on going and more than 750 houses and around a hundred shops were covered. On the evening of the 12th our ladies group went for reminder invitations to various houses.

On the 13th nearly one hundred people came for the program and got their Realization.

On the 15th a new centre was opened with the twelve names of Shri Ganesha, meditation, Shri Mataji’s talk for a few minutes, aarti and a brief description of Shri Mataji’s life and the importance of coming to the centre.

We request all our brothers and sisters to pray for this centre’s strong establishment.
Rajesh and the collective of Jharkhand

The true desire of our dear sister and brother from two different and difficult places has worked wonders to spread their wings of love and to take Sahaja Yoga to so many.
Rabi Ghosh

A Little Ripple in the Heart of My Mother
Your personality has to be something that people should say, “This is a real guru we have met.”

As the sea has faith in itself, you should have complete faith in yourself.

For that, you know very well, you don’t have to give up your family, don’t have to give up anything. But ego, if it is still there, I don’t know what to say, but you must get rid of it completely. And collectively also, ego should be driven out. Collectively.

It’s a thing that people are egoistical secretly within themselves, but sometimes it shows. It’s a very subtle, nonsensical disease that people have and they just indulge into it….

So that should be your widened vision, not for only your school, college or university, your this or that, but a very wider vision one should have and that you have to develop through your working into every type of circumstances, every type of problem you have. Once you develop that kind of a personality, then you’ll be amazed how you can help so many people.

I know there are so many Sahaja Yogis here who are worthy of praise and really I love them very much and they also love Me very much, but one should always see that, as you are now going to be the gurus, you have to be careful not to think that you are a guru. You should never think you are a guru already. Once you start thinking, again Mr. Ego, the guru, comes up.

So, once you decide that “I am nothing. I’m nothing. I’m just a little ripple in the Heart of my Mother” – if such a humble feeling you get, then all your problems can be solved and things will work out because your attention and your behavior is going to impress other people. Nothing else. Whatever you may try, it is you who is going to get Sahaja Yoga further.
Guru Puja, 20 July 1997, Cabella Italy

So all of you can work it out and do such a lot. But have faith in yourself. As the sea has faith in itself, you should have complete faith in yourself. You must respect your Self Realization. Tell every day to yourself, “I am a Sahaja Yogi. I’m a yogi. I’m a saint. I’m a realized soul. I have to do this. How can I do these other nonsensical things? I have to do these good things. I have to talk to people in a sweet manner. I have to try to work it out this way.”

It is actually your faith in yourself is going to help you. Your faith in yourself that you are a great Sahaja Yogi, that you are absolutely surrendered to your Mother works very fast. That faith you should have, that you are a Sahaja Yogi. Nothing else is needed.
Shri Lakshmi Puja, 29 December 1991, Alibag India

mountain
by Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi

I see a mountain from my window
Standing like an ancient sage,
Desireless, full of love.

So many trees and so many flowers,
They plunder the mountain all the time.
Its attention is not disturbed
And when the rain pours like
Many pitchers of clouds bursting
And it fills the mountain with greenery.

The storms may come soaring,
Filling the lake with compassion
And the rivers flow running down
Towards the calling sea.
The sun will create clouds and
Wind carries on its feathery wings
The rain on to the mountain.
This is the eternal play

The mountain sees
Without desires.

Copyright © 2026 Nirmala Vidya Amruta. All Rights Reserved. Privacy | Terms of Use | Amruta is supported by the WordPress Multilingual Plugin. | oska.dev