SOURCE: unknown
DATE: 2026-01-24
TALK: Golden Memories with Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi – early Sahaja Yogis from Brighton, South East England
LOCATION/EVENT: england
SAVED: 2026-05-16 08:24:51
CHARS: 31726
---
Nirmala Vidya Amruta

The Divine teachings of Shri Mataji

Search for:
Search...
Primary MenuSkip to content
Shri Mataji’s talks
All talks
Talk of the Day & Random Date
Sahaja Yoga Encyclopedia
Video Excerpts with Subtitles
How To Transcribe, Verify Or Translate Talks?
Extras
All Events
Golden Memories
Help & FAQ
Heritage
News & Recently Updated Events
Photos
Prayers and Praises
Sahaj Material
Books
Statistics 
The list of Categories & Tags
Travel Log Map
Install
About
Contact
Devi Productions (Preservation Team)
Expenses
Donate
User
Dashboard
Password Change
Donor Dashboard
Your Favorites

English
Post navigation
Previous post:
sahaj de Michel Cernay 1 of 2
Next post:
Golden Memories with Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi – early Sahaja Yogis from Brighton, South East England
Golden Memories Sahaja Yoga in conversation with Dr Suresh Nigam
England  View Map
Saturday, December 21st, 2024 
Leave a comment
Golden Memories (Without Shri Mataji)
England
AI-generated transcript GM
Favorite
PDF
 Share
English

2026-01-24 Golden Memories Sahaja Yoga in conversation with Dr Suresh Nigam, 98′
Show Video Details 
Dear Sahaja Yogis, this machine-generated transcript has not yet been reviewed by our team. We encourage you to help us improve it by reviewing for accuracy and sending any corrections to help@amruta.org. 
21 December 2024
(England)
Interviewer: Namaste, Shri Mataji. This morning we have the pleasure of having Dr. Suresh Nigam with us to talk about his precious times with Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, who we fondly call Mother. We are doing this interview online because Dr. Nigam is in Delhi and we are here near London. Thank you so much for taking the time out to join us this morning on the occasion of World Meditation Day.

Dr. Nigam, will you please tell us about your first meeting with Shri Mataji? I believe it was in 1981. Could you give us the feel of the place and where you were? Over to you.

Dr. Nigam: Yes. Before I met Shri Mataji, I got my realization from a Sahaja Yogi. I started improving within two or three days. I had a paralytic stroke, which was very severe. I was in a very bad shape. So, when they told me to do foot soaking, I did it for only one day and I felt so much better. It was my good luck that Shri Mataji was in London and was about to come to India in another fortnight, so I was very excited to meet her.

Her program was very near my house. I went there one hour earlier than scheduled and took the front seat. Shri Mataji came and we all listened to her. Then she gave realization. She asked us to raise our Kundalini. I could not raise my hand. So she asked me, “What has happened to you?” I said, “I had a paralytic stroke, Shri Mataji.” She said, “All right.”

In the middle of her talk, she called me on the stage and asked me to sit down. She sat on a chair, put her left foot on my back, and kept on speaking. After 10-15 minutes, everything was over. About 20-25% of the people had gone. So I asked Shri Mataji, “Can I ask you a question?” She said, “Yes, why not?”

I said, “Shri Mataji, I suffered a paralytic stroke. I could not sleep for 13 months, and I was in a very bad shape. They only told me to sit with some salt water, and within a day or two, I got a very nice sleep. How has this happened? I hadn’t seen you, nor did they give me any medicine. So how and why am I improving?” This was the doctor’s mind.

She said, “Don’t worry, everything will be all right. You do one thing: do research on Sahaja Yoga.” I said, “Shri Mataji, I don’t know anybody.” She said, “Don’t worry, just try it. Keep trying.” I said, “All right, Shri Mataji.”

Luckily, my brother-in-law was in charge of a department at a medical college, so I requested him to do research on Sahaja Yoga. He told me, “Suresh, it is not possible now.” I asked why. He said, “Because the government has already spent so much money on research on Yoga, but no good results have come.” I told this to Shri Mataji. She said, “Don’t worry, you carry on.”

And then her play started. After a few days, Dr. U. C. Rai himself got sick and was admitted to a hospital. I told Shri Mataji he was admitted. At that time, some senior doctors like Dr. Warren, Dr. Rustogi, and Dr. David Spiro—all these doctors, including Bogdan—were staying in Delhi with Shri Mataji. Mother told me, “Take them to the hospital.” Before the five doctors went to the hospital, Mother said very casually, “Just give him vibrations.” They gave him vibrations, and Dr. Rai became all right within a day or two and was discharged.

Interviewer: Just to put it in perspective, sorry to interrupt. You got your realization in 1981, and Shri Mataji asked you to do research on the effects of Sahaja Yoga because you come from the medical field. It was not possible because the Government of India had already overspent its budget on such research projects. Then Dr. U. C. Rai took ill, and Shri Mataji asked the Sahaja Yogis from the West—like you just named, Dr. Spiro, Dr. Warren, Dr. Rustogi—for you to take them to see Dr. Rai in the hospital. Was this in 1981?

Dr. Nigam: No, no, no. It was in 1986.

Interviewer: Oh, so this visit to the hospital was in 1986. By which time you had completely recovered from your paralysis?

Dr. Nigam: Oh, yes. In between, Dr. U. C. Rai was transferred from Delhi to another place, Pondicherry. He was there for three or four years. When he came back, this happened.

Interviewer: Okay. So tell us about this visit of all these Sahaja Yogis that Shri Mataji asked you to take to see Dr. Rai in the hospital. What was it like?

Dr. Nigam: It was very ordinary. We were standing around him, and everybody just… we surrounded the bed and started giving vibrations for hardly 10-15 minutes. Dr. Rai came out of the hospital on the second day.

Interviewer: Did you have Shri Mataji’s photo with you? I assume you were all wearing Shri Mataji’s pendant, but did you have Shri Mataji’s photo near Dr. Rai at all?

Dr. Nigam: No photograph. And then I took him to Shri Mataji. She guided him; I’ve got all the videos of her guiding him while I’m sitting there.

So, in the beginning, when the research started, he was the head of the department. The rule is that you have to give the case to somebody, to the reader. A lady reader was appointed by Dr. Rai to do the research, and she was not satisfied with Sahaja Yoga in the beginning. Five or six of us went there every day. I do not know whether she was a negative person or what, but she didn’t take any interest. But because her boss was my brother-in-law, she couldn’t refuse.

One day I also got annoyed with her. I told her, “You take my BP.” She took my BP. Science says you can increase the BP of anybody within one minute—just give him some shocking news, and it will shoot up. But you can’t bring it down without medicine. I said, “You take my BP.” She took it. Then I said, “I’ll meditate just for 10 minutes.” I meditated for 10 minutes, and the BP came down. Then she started believing. She took full interest, and two doctors got their MD for the first time on yoga. This was in ’87 or ’88, something like that.

Interviewer: Which institution was that?

Dr. Nigam: Maulana Azad Medical College in Delhi. You must know the name of Lady Hardinge Medical College.

Interviewer: Yes, yes.

Dr. Nigam: Lady Hardinge Medical College has been renamed Maulana Azad Medical College.

Interviewer: I see. Okay.

Dr. Nigam: So, when this happened, we were all very happy. Shri Mataji called a meeting of doctors. Then she sent all these doctors—I can name them: Dr. Spiro, Dr. Sara Settle, Dr. Wells from London, Dr. Warren, Dr. Amjad.

We had a treaty with the Russian government. The Russian government wanted something to be done in Russia as far as spirituality is concerned. So, we signed a treaty with Russia that we will come and teach you yoga.

Interviewer: Remind us of the year and time of this treaty, please.

Dr. Nigam: It was 1998. We have a copy of that. It was an MOU signed with Yogi Mahajan and one doctor from Russia. Then we were officially invited. Mother said, “You should go to Russia.” Because during that period, North India was doing very well. Mother was very happy.

I will tell you the story because she was very unhappy with Lucknow.

Interviewer: Please tell us in Hindi also, because there are certain expressions that come out more in Hindi, and Shri Mataji talking in Hindi as well. Please do combine the two languages as you expertly can.

Dr. Nigam: It’s all right. I was from North India; I was from Kanpur and my wife was from Lucknow. I requested Shri Mataji, “Please come to Lucknow.” She said, “Nothing doing. I will not come to Lucknow.” Bluntly. I used to drive her here and there. On the way, I asked her, “Shri Mataji, when do you intend to come to Lucknow?” And she would say, “Nothing doing.” I think it was around 1990.

You see, I don’t remember the dates because I was most of the time busy. Even the date when Shri Mataji came to my house, I don’t know it, even today. I’m trying to find out. I’ve got the video; I sent it to you.

Interviewer: So, how did you convince Shri Mataji to come to Lucknow?

Dr. Nigam: Ultimately, when I insisted a lot, she said, “Okay, let’s go.” Some people from Dehradun had also requested Shri Mataji to come to Dehradun. So when I requested, she said, “All right, we’ll go via Dehradun to Lucknow.”

We booked a bogie and went to Dehradun, did the program there, and then we went to Lucknow. The arrangement was that she said, “I will not stay in Lucknow.” I said, “It’s all right, Shri Mataji.” The Lucknow people had hired a lawn very close to the station. The program was scheduled to start at 6 o’clock and finish by 8:30 or 9:00, and the train was at 10 o’clock. From there, we would board the train.

But it so happened, even I didn’t believe it—many people came, and a good gentry came. They all listened to Shri Mataji. When the program ended around 9 o’clock, we took Shri Mataji to the car. As she sat in the car, two or three hundred people gathered around it, saying, “Shri Mataji, Pranam! Shri Mataji, bless me!” It was getting late, already 9:30 or so. But they didn’t let the car move.

Normally, I traveled quite a lot with Shri Mataji. Whenever I went, other people would want to sit with her in the car, so I always let them sit, as I sat with her every day. The car was already full, and I was waiting for the next car just behind us. But the public didn’t let the car move.

So, Mother said, “What are you doing, Dr. Nigam?” She caught my hand and pulled me inside the car. I sat on her only. I was feeling very hesitant. She said, “Sit down. I’m your Mother.”

The moment we reached the station, the train gave the first whistle. When Mother stepped up into the compartment, she could not even sit down before the train moved. The moment she sat, she told me, “Dr. Nigam, I had never expected there were so many people here. It’s a fact, but there’s no guidance. Things will improve.”

And after that, the whole of UP improved. Even in one village, every single person of that village became a Sahaja Yogi. Things improved very fast.

Interviewer: This visit of Shri Mataji with you to Lucknow, when was this? 1991? 1992?

Dr. Nigam: Either ’90 or ’91. I’ve got the video; I can send the whole video.

Interviewer: Yes, please do. Lucknow is also very dear to us because we belong to that city. It’s really nice to know that eventually, Shri Mataji was very pleased with the seekers and Sahaja Yoga took such roots in the city and surrounding areas.

Dr. Nigam: Shri Mataji also built that house in Nirala Nagar. She told how she built the house; it will take a long time.

Interviewer: Please tell us.

Dr. Nigam: During her daughter’s wedding, my wife Renu took her to Lucknow. There, she showed her a very big miracle. Shri Mataji was sitting in the wedding mandap, and my wife was sitting next to her. Mother just gave her a hint, “Look, look.” She could not understand. Then she said, “Upar dekho, gan baithe hue hain.” (Look up, the ganas are sitting there). And when she looked up, they were in the thousands.

She also told me that when she was coming back, not from Lucknow but from Patna, she had gone with my wife to Patna. On the plane, she told her, “Look there, on the window glass.” Lots of Kundalinis were moving with the plane.

It happened with me once also. Mother wanted to purchase some earthen pots. She said we have to go to Khurja. I booked a full bogie whenever I would travel with her. My brother-in-law was in the railways, so there was no problem. We used to book a full compartment for her, carry the food with us, and go and come back the same day.

The bogie was detached at Tundla, and we had booked the railway guesthouse for Shri Mataji. We went there, and she went shopping. So many things were purchased. She spotted one piece full of dust, a very old thing nobody would want to see, it was so dirty. She said, “Take it out. Bring it down.” When he took it out, it was such a beautiful piece. I was just amazed. How could she, without seeing it, know? She said, “Send all this to Delhi.” He said, “I will need a truck for this.” So, a truck came. He said, “We need a bigger truck.” Then a bus was called. The stuff filled the bus.

When Shri Mataji came back from shopping, we had to go back by train. In the guesthouse, after she had her lunch, we were massaging her feet. She was lying down and immediately she said, “Dekho, Kundalini uth rahi hai.” (Look, the Kundalini is rising). Thousands and thousands and thousands of Kundalini were coming out from her Sahastrara. I saw that. They were four or five feet above her head. Thousands and thousands of Kundalinis. It was incredible. This was in the Tundla guesthouse.

Interviewer: Amazing. How did you invite Shri Mataji to your house and what was it like?

Dr. Nigam: The best part is, she was coming to my house, and I didn’t know she was coming. It was in ’90 or ’91. My mother called me for some work. I went, and then she sent me to the emporiums at Baba Kharak Singh Marg. I went there for some work around 11 o’clock and came back around 2 o’clock. The girl who was staying in the ashram told me, “How are you here?” I said, “What happened?” “Mother is coming to your house and you are here?”

“When?” I asked. “She’s coming this evening.” And it was already 2 o’clock. I just ran towards my house, which was about half an hour away. When I entered the house, there were 15 or 20 Sahaja Yogis already there decorating the place. I didn’t know Shri Mataji was coming! I have a photograph and the full video of that.

Shri Mataji came. In the evening, she had said, “I’ve got a little bit of a headache, but I’ll come.” She came in her car around 8 o’clock and left around 1:30 or 2:00 in the night. All these people were there, singing bhajans and everything. There she told us, “Look, now I am better. The reason is, when I am sick, don’t take me to the hospital. Take me to the Sahaja Yogis. When Sahaja Yogis are there, I am better.”

Interviewer: Where was she staying in Delhi when she visited you?

Dr. Nigam: Right from the beginning, in ’82, ’83, she was living in her brother’s house, Mr. N. K. P. Salve. He was a minister. They had built a house in Vasant Kunj, and she was living there. I used to go there in the morning with both my children and stay the whole day.

See, you must know how Sahaja Yoga started for me. I was a free person. Luckily, I got a very good car because I had become handicapped. For one year, the Government of India allowed the import of automatic transmission cars. At that time, there were none in India. So, I imported one car. The senior Sahaja Yogis, Mr. Venugopalan and Mr. Subramaniam, told me, “You stay with Shri Mataji. Go with her wherever she wants. Do all her duties.” I was absolutely new, but I said yes.

So, I used to hover around Shri Mataji all the time, just like a small child. I didn’t know why. Now, people ask me, but I just used to feel very happy. My wife and both children used to play around Shri Mataji. She used to talk to my wife more than me. This was in the house in Vasant Vihar.

After that, we had a small ashram, the Safdarjung ashram. She didn’t stay there because it was a very small place. Sometimes she would stay in the guesthouse of Rajesh Shah. This was for two or three years in the late 80s, around ’87.

Then, during this period, we were constructing a house in Noida, a very nice, beautiful house. I was told to look after things. So I went to purchase marble, to do fittings, and all this. Shri Mataji was perfect in everything. After that, Pratishthan was being built in Pune, so I used to supply things from Delhi for Pratishthan.

Interviewer: Tell us some of the conversations or advice that Shri Mataji gave you from those times when the ashrams were being made.

Dr. Nigam: She always looked at the map, the design of the house. She was very particular about the architecture. She said to use the best materials and so on. At that time, we were asking each and every question of Shri Mataji; without asking, we would do nothing. She used to give us time.

Once I sent something worth about 2000 rupees for the house. She asked me, “How much money do I owe you?” We also wanted to contribute to this house. I told her that, and she was so annoyed with me. “Tum kya chahte ho? Main ek ghar apne liye bana rahi hoon. Isse mera ghar rehne do.” (What do you want? I am building one house for myself. Let it be my house.) The rest of the things you decide yourself. So she didn’t take our contribution and she paid for everything.

This kept on going until the final things were made in Pratishthan, Pune. There she developed a new technique for erecting the pillars. I’ll send you the photograph; luckily, I was there and somebody clicked it. They look like they are of stone, but they are not. They are made of small stone pieces, but they look exactly like solid stone. She developed that. We had a young architect I introduced to Shri Mataji, and Mother said, “Don’t tell this technique to anybody else. This is a special technique.” People used to go and see that.

There are many other things related to Sahaja Yoga.

Interviewer: Any other miracles you want to share?

Dr. Nigam: Now we are coming to the point. When she was going to Bombay… in those days, in the 80s, the Delhi domestic and international airports were side by side. Across the road was the parking lot. Me, my wife, and Shri Mataji were going to the airport. When we arrived, I told my wife, “You go with Shri Mataji and I’ll just park the car.” My wife said, “No, no, you go with Shri Mataji, I’ll park the car.”

So, Shri Mataji and I got out at the gate and my wife went to park the car. We entered, and I said, “Shri Mataji, come and sit down here.” She said, “No, no. Let Mrs. Nigam come, then we’ll sit down.” In those two or three minutes, she said, “Doctor, raat ko yeh log aaye the aur bahut tang kiya.” (Doctor, these people came last night and bothered me a lot). I looked around but there was nobody. She pointed towards a Sardarji who was sitting in the corner, and she said, “Yeh right Nabhi se pakda hua hai.” (He is catching on his right Nabhi).

She never taught me Sahaja Yoga, but she made me learn it.

Interviewer: Tell me more tips. This is so beautiful.

Dr. Nigam: The biggest thing is, I want all Sahaja Yogis to listen and understand this. This is a scientific fact, showing how Sahaja Yoga is scientific.

Once she came back from London and I went to receive her. On the way, she said, “Doctor, Sadhana [her daughter] is very annoyed with me because I don’t go to her place. I want to go to Patna.” “All right, Shri Mataji.” We reached the ashram and when we sat down, she said, “Doctor, I think I’ll go to Patna tomorrow.” “Yes, Shri Mataji.” She said she would go for 15 days.

So I asked her, “Shri Mataji, you’re going. Our children are also on leave. Can we go out for these 15 days with the children?” She said, “Yes, you can go, but return on this date when I return.”

So, she went there, and I went to a hill station with my children. I was traveling in a lone jungle on a hill when I saw a car coming from the front. When I saw the driver, I realized I knew him. He was a doctor, one year junior to me. He also recognized me and stopped. He was in a picnic mood, and we were too. We decided to cook there and sat down.

He was a spiritual man, and we started talking about spirituality. I had met him after 17 years. I did not know what he was doing, and he did not know what I was doing. But he came to know through somebody that I had become some kind of Baba, because I had left smoking and drinking.

I was telling him about Kundalini and he was telling me about the Vedas and Puranas. In the end, he told me, “You know, I can believe all your talks. But that the Kundalini can rise in such a short time, I don’t believe it.” I said, “It’s all right. You’re right.” We ate something and departed.

The next day, I came back to Delhi. He went his way. I received Shri Mataji at the airport and we came back to the ashram. The first thing she asked me was, “How was your trip?” I said, “Shri Mataji, very nice. But I met a friend. When I told him about Sahaja Yoga, he said he could believe everything, but he cannot believe that the Kundalini can rise in such a short time.”

She asked me, “What is his name?” I said, “Shri Mataji, Dr. Bhatnagar.” She said, “Achha, woh ENT surgeon.” (Oh, that ENT surgeon).

Of course, he was an Ear, Nose, and Throat specialist. This is science. Now, how stupid I was, I also tried to do that. For two months, I tried. But it cannot happen when she has said it. This was a big scientific thing which I wanted to share.

Interviewer: That is very nice, a very good incident to show how Shri Mataji knows everything.

Dr. Nigam: Yes, and she would always behave as if she doesn’t know anything. This is the best part.

One day she explained something about foot soaking, which I have sent to you. She told this thing in Australia. She said everyone is supposed to do foot soaking (futsokriya). This was around ’91 or ’92. These all happened in the best days of Sahaja Yoga. From ’81 to ’98, around the clock, I was with her. I traveled with her everywhere.

Interviewer: Tell us, Dr. Nigam, how did Shri Mataji start Sahaja Yoga in Delhi? That’s a place of power, and people are often more busy with power, fame, and money rather than spirituality.

Dr. Nigam: In the beginning, there were hardly any Sahaja Yogis. As I told you, she used to live in her brother’s house. Me, my wife, and my two children would sit there the whole day. Only five or six people used to come in the whole day to meet her. Everybody was free to come.

In Mother’s room—it was a new house, not fully done up—there was a bed, two or three chairs, and that’s all. There was a photo of Mother, and in front of that, we lit a candle. She used to say, “Light a candle.” If somebody came and he was left-sided, she would say, “Light a candle,” and we would do candling just with that one candle kept in front of Shri Mataji’s photo. People would say, “Yes, Shri Mataji, I’m feeling better.”

Now, after our ashram was built, a lady came there. Up till this time, I was not a leader, but I was an attendant of Shri Mataji, so I was bigger than any leader. A lady came and Shri Mataji saw her. She told me the lady had a left-sided problem. “Inka left vishuddhi bahut kharab hai. Inko candle treatment do.” (Her left Vishuddhi is very bad. Give her candle treatment). That lady said, “Shri Mataji, there is no Sahaja Yogi in our house. How can I take candle treatment?”

And she told us for the first time about the three-candle treatment. She said, “Keep one candle in front, keep one on the left, and keep one on the back.” This is how, gradually, things improved.

Then, for the Russian thing in ’89, she called me and said, “Dr. Nigam, now you have to go to Russia. Keep some money with you because you have to stay there longer.” We went to Russia. There was an international yoga conference with yogis from all over—Mahesh Yogi, Iyengar, Osho’s people, all of them came. From India, Mother sent 8-10 people, mostly doctors.

We got a phone call from the organizers. “Doctor, come and see if you need anything, because tomorrow we are going to have the conference.” So, seven or eight doctors along with three or four Sahaja Yogis went to the venue. When we went there, we saw a lady from Osho. She was a thin American woman, and she was walking around haughtily.

I told Dr. Aileen, who was in charge from our side, “Doctor, we don’t need anything. We only need to hang this poster of Shri Mataji. That’s all.” We came back. On the way back, a young boy, 15 or 16 years old, who had gotten his realization only about a month back, asked me, “Uncle, why not shoe beat?” He only knew three things: foot soaking, candling, and shoe beating.

I said, “It’s all right.” When we reached our flat, I told that boy, “You do the shoe beating.” We did it. The conference went on for seven days, and that girl stayed in the hospital for seven days. She could not attend the program. Shri Mataji laughed a lot when she heard this. She said, “Now you people have become very deep.”

Then, all of a sudden, she said, “You people are not coming for the puja?” There was a puja in Italy after three or four days. We had no visa, not much money, and we had not thought of going. Me, Bogdan, and another Sahaja Yogi known as Lev Navratil were together. Lev was a very smart guy; he knew Russian, Italian, and English. He said, “When Mother has asked, ‘Are you not coming to our puja?’ we should go.” I said, “You have got a British passport; you don’t need a visa. I need a visa. How can I go?”

Luckily, a couple of days ago, we had a meeting with someone from the Indian embassy, Mr. Srivastav. Lev rang him up and explained. Mr. Srivastav said, “I have a friend who used to work in the Italian embassy. If he is there, your work will be done.” He talked to his friend, and in the evening, we got a call that the work would be done. We went and gave my passport. The next day, we went at two o’clock to collect it. I opened it and saw the visa.

Then the officer asked me, “Give me the letter.” I said, “Which letter?” He said, “Srivastav did not give you any letter?” I said no. He took the passport from me, opened the page, and put a stamp on it. Cancelled. Within two minutes, the visa was cancelled. You can understand my position. A day later, we had to go.

We again rang up Mr. Srivastav. He said, “Yes, I told him I would give a letter, but I just forgot. All right, I will give you another letter. Come tomorrow and take it.” In the morning, we went there, he gave me the letter, and again I went to the embassy. The same gentleman met me. I gave him the letter, and he gave us the visa around one or two o’clock. We took a taxi from there and ran to the airport. Our flight was at three o’clock.

We reached the airport, ran, and got the flight from Moscow to Rome. We got off at Rome airport at six o’clock and took a taxi to the railway station to catch a train. As soon as we reached the station, I saw for the first time in my life that a railway station can be locked. After nine o’clock in Italy, there were no trains. A man was locking up.

Lev ran and asked the man inside, “Brother, it is very important for us to go.” He said there were no more trains. He was about to come back dejected when the man called him again. “Look, today a special train is going from here. It’s for soccer players.” You understand soccer players; they can kill anyone. “If that train stops here, you can get on it. But you can’t get a full ticket. It’s nine o’clock, you have to take a chance.”

Luckily, that train came and stopped. The three of us got on. There was no place even for standing, and 90% of the people were drunk or on drugs. There were two groups of supporters, and a big commotion was going on. We had no tickets. I was worried. After some time, some people got up and left, and they didn’t come back. So we sat down. Lev told me, “Whatever happens, you should just act like you are totally drunk or a drug addict.”

When the ticket checker came, he asked Lev for the ticket. Lev said something in Italian. I did not have a ticket. The ticket checker shouted at me. I could not understand him. I just pretended to be drunk. The man was so disgusted, he just left.

We got off at our station at 1:30 in the night. The station was closed. We were hungry. Lev went somewhere and came back with three packets of biscuits. That was our dinner. Early in the morning, around 5:30, we started walking. Luckily, we found a cab. We went to the hotel and rang up the puja place. The puja was to start at 9 o’clock. They told us that buses were coming at 7:30 to pick people up. We reached the hotel just in time.

As we were entering, Shri Mataji came from the other side. She saw us. She didn’t say anything to Bogdan or Lev. She came to me and held my hand. “Aa gaye tum?” (You came?). “Yes, Shri Mataji.” “Chalo, gaadi mein baitho.” (Come, sit in the car). She made me sit with her in the car and we went to the puja.

After the puja, she called me. She held my hands and said, “Dekho, Anand mein rehna chahiye. Jab tum Anand mein rehte ho, tabhi Kundalini upar aati hai.” (Look, you should remain in joy. When you are in joy, only then does the Kundalini rise). I only came to know the reason for this recently. The reason she said this was because of the struggles we went through to get there.

Interviewer: When we were recording the golden memories here in England, Shri Mataji’s grandson shared an incident where Shri Mataji had told him that whatever you have to do, be joyful. It is so important that one has to be joyful for the Kundalini to rise. Did she tell you anything about how to start a new center?

Dr. Nigam: Yes. Her principle was that if you want to open a new center, you should give realization to one person from that area. Choose one person in the village, give him realization, and work on him for five or six days so that he understands and feels it. Then, you go and ask that local person to speak about it. Maybe he is not a very good orator, but let him speak. You also help him afterward. Let him do the work. That is how he will improve. Then he will tell another, and another will tell others. This is how it grows.

Interviewer: Amazing.

Dr. Nigam: You must have also heard her say, “Don’t read the newspaper in the morning.” So we all stopped reading newspapers. After five or six years, one day she called me in the morning in her Noida house. Sir C.P. was sitting on one side, and she was coming out from her room. She saw him reading the newspaper. She started shouting, “Don’t read the newspaper! Don’t read the newspaper!” She didn’t listen to the second part. She said, “Agar padhna hai toh andar ki khabar padho.” (If you have to read, read the inner news). That’s what she meant. But people only hear half of it. This is the problem we are having in the present day.

Interviewer: We will join you in another session at some point soon, but thank you so much. Thank you for taking your time out and reflecting on those precious memories, the golden times with Shri Mataji herself. You shared so many beautiful moments with us. Thank you so much.

Dr. Nigam: Thank you. Jai Shri Mataji.

Interviewer: Jai Shri Mataji.

Leave a Reply
Logged in as Prashant handge. Edit your profile. Log out? Required fields are marked *

Comment *


Copyright © 2026 Nirmala Vidya Amruta. All Rights Reserved. Privacy | Terms of Use | Amruta is supported by the WordPress Multilingual Plugin. | oska.dev